keps/sig-instrumentation/0034-distributed-tracing-kep.md, before:

---
title: Tracing API Server Requests
authors:
  - "@Monkeyanator"
  - "@dashpole"
editor: "@dashpole"
owning-sig: sig-instrumentation
participating-sigs:
  - sig-architecture
  - sig-api-machinery
  - sig-scalability
  - sig-cli
reviewers:
  - "@logicalhan"
approvers:
  - "@brancz"
  - "@lavalamp"
creation-date: 2018-12-04
last-updated: 2020-04-29
status: implementable
---

# Tracing API Server Requests

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Definitions](#definitions)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests)
  - [Kubectl integration](#kubectl-integration)
  - [Vendor OpenTelemetry and the OT Exporter](#vendor-opentelemetry-and-the-ot-exporter)
  - [Controlling use of the OpenTelemetry library](#controlling-use-of-the-opentelemetry-library)
- [Graduation requirements](#graduation-requirements)
- [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
  - [Other OpenTelemetry Exporters](#other-opentelemetry-exporters)
- [Production Readiness Survey](#production-readiness-survey)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal (KEP) proposes enhancing the API Server to allow tracing requests.


## Motivation

Along with metrics and logs, traces are a useful form of telemetry to aid with debugging incoming requests.  The API Server currently uses a poor-man's form of tracing (see [github.com/kubernetes/utils/trace](https://github.com/kubernetes/utils/tree/master/trace)), but we can make use of distributed tracing to improve the ease of use and enable easier analysis of trace data.  Trace data is structured, providing the detail necessary to debug requests, and context propagation allows plugins, such as admission webhooks, to add to API Server requests.

### Definitions

**Span**: The smallest unit of a trace.  It has a start and end time, and is attached to a single trace.
**Trace**: A collection of Spans which represents a single process.
**Trace Context**: A reference to a Trace that is designed to be propagated across component boundaries.  Sometimes referred to as the "Span Context".  It is can be thought of as a pointer to a parent span that child spans can be attached to.

### Goals

* The API Server generates and exports spans for incoming and outgoing requests.
* The API Server propagates context from incoming requests to outgoing requests.
* Kubectl clients can easily specify that a request should be traced.

### Non-Goals

* Tracing in kubernetes controllers
* Replace existing logging, metrics, or the events API
* Trace operations from all Kubernetes resource types in a generic manner (i.e. without manual instrumentation)
* Change metrics or logging (e.g. to support trace-metric correlation)
* Access control to tracing backends

## Proposal

### Tracing API Requests

We will wrap the API Server's http server and http clients with [othttp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/tree/master/plugin/othttp) to get spans for incoming and outgoing http requests, and add the [otgrpc](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-opentracing/tree/master/go/otgrpc) DialOption to the etcd grpc client.  This generates spans for all sampled incoming requests and propagates context with all client requests.  For incoming requests, this would go below [WithRequestInfo](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9eb097c4b07ea59c674a69e19c1519f0d10f2fa8/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/config.go#L676) in the filter stack, as it must be after authentication and authorization, before the panic filter, and is closest in function to the WithRequestInfo filter.

Note that some clients of the API Server, such as webhooks, may make reentrant calls to the API Server.  To gain the full benefit of tracing, such clients should propagate context with requests back to the API Server.

### Kubectl integration

Fundamentally, a trace is a graph showing the fulfilment of user intent.  To make tracing in kubernetes useful, we need to ensure users have the ability to declare their intent for their request to be traced.  Add a new `--trace` argument to `kubectl`, which generates a new trace context, sets the trace context to be sampled, and uses the context when sending requests to the API Server.  The option is false by default.

### Vendor OpenTelemetry and the OT Exporter

This KEP proposes the use of the [OpenTelemetry tracing framework](https://opentelemetry.io/) to create and export spans to configured backends.

The API Server will use the [OpenTelemetry exporter format](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto), which exports traces to a local port.  This format is compatible with the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector), which allows importing and configuring exporters for trace storage backends to be done out-of-tree in addition to other useful features.  The exporter stores spans in memory, and uses the [batching processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#batching-processor) to batch requests and send them asynchronously.

Add configuration to the API Server required to configure the opentelemetry exporter, including the address and network to send spans to.

### Controlling use of the OpenTelemetry library

As the community found in the [Metrics Stability Framework KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-instrumentation/20190404-kubernetes-control-plane-metrics-stability.md#kubernetes-control-plane-metrics-stability), having control over how the client libraries are used in kubernetes can enable maintainers to enforce policy and make broad improvements to the quality of telemetry.  To enable future improvements to tracing, we will restrict the direct use of the OpenTelemetry library within the kubernetes code base, and provide wrapped versions of functions we wish to expose in a utility library.

## Graduation requirements

Alpha

- [] Implement tracing of incoming and outgoing http/grpc requests in the kube-apiserver
- [] Add a `--trace` flag to kubectl
- [] E2e testing of apiserver tracing
- [] User-facing documentation

Beta

- [] Benchmark kubernetes components using tracing
- [] Publish documentation on examples of how to use the OT Collector with kubernetes
- [] Scalability testing


## Alternatives considered

### Other OpenTelemetry Exporters

This KEP suggests that we utilize the OpenTelemetry exporter format in all components.  Alternative options include:

1. Add configuration for many exporters in-tree by vendoring multiple "supported" exporters. These exporters are the only compatible backends for tracing in kubernetes.
  a. This places the kubernetes community in the position of curating supported tracing backends
2. Support *both* a curated set of in-tree exporters, and the collector exporter

## Production Readiness Survey

* Feature enablement and rollback
  - How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?  **Feature-gate: APIServerTracing.  The API Server must be restarted to enable/disable exporting spans.**
  - Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e., can we roll
    back the enablement)?  **Yes, the feature gate can be disabled in the API Server**
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime for the control
    plane?  **Yes, the API Server must be restarted with the feature-gate disabled.**
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?  **No.**
  - What happens if a cluster with this feature enabled is rolled back? What happens if it is subsequently upgraded again?  **Rolling back this feature would break the added tracing telemetry, but would not affect the cluster.**
  - Are there tests for this?  **No.  The feature hasn't been developed yet.**
* Scalability
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in any new API calls? **No.**
    Describe them with their impact keeping in mind the [supported limits][]
    (e.g. 5000 nodes per cluster, 100 pods/s churn) focusing mostly on:
     - components listing and/or watching resources they didn't before
     - API calls that may be triggered by changes of some Kubernetes
       resources (e.g. update object X based on changes of object Y)
     - periodic API calls to reconcile state (e.g. periodic fetching state,
       heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in supporting new API types? **No**
    How many objects of that type will be supported (and how that translates
    to limitations for users)?
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in increasing size or count
    of the existing API objects?  **No.**
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in increasing time taken
    by any operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs][] (e.g. by adding
    additional work, introducing new steps in between, etc.)? **Yes.  It will increase API Server request latency by a negligible amount (<1 microsecond) for encoding and decoding the trace contex from headers, and recording spans in memory.  Exporting spans is not in the critical path.**
    Please describe the details if so.
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in non-negligible increase
    of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk IO, ...) in any components?
    Things to keep in mind include: additional in-memory state, additional
    non-trivial computations, excessive access to disks (including increased
    log volume), significant amount of data sent and/or received over
    network, etc. Think through this in both small and large cases, again
    with respect to the [supported limits][].  **The tracing client library has a small, in-memory cache for outgoing spans.**
* Rollout, Upgrade, and Rollback Planning
* Dependencies
  - Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster
    (e.g., a metrics service)? **Yes.  In the current version of the proposal, users can run the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) to configure which backend (e.g. jager, zipkin, etc.) they want telemetry sent to.**
  - How does this feature respond to complete failures of the services on
    which it depends?  **Traces will stop being exported, and components will store spans in memory until the buffer is full.  After the buffer fills up, spans will be dropped.**
  - How does this feature respond to degraded performance or high error rates
    from services on which it depends? **If the bi-directional grpc streaming connection to the collector cannot be established or is broken, the controller retries the connection every 5 minutes (by default).**
* Monitoring requirements
  - How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?  **Operators are generally expected to have access to the trace backend.**
  - How can an operator determine if the feature is functioning properly?
  - What are the service level indicators an operator can use to determine the
    health of the service?  **Error rate of sending traces in the API Server and OpenTelemetry collector.**
  - What are reasonable service level objectives for the feature?  **Not entirely sure, but I would expect at least 99% of spans to be sent successfully, if not more.**
* Troubleshooting
  - What are the known failure modes?  **The API Server is misconfigured, and cannot talk to the collector.  The collector is misconfigured, and can't send traces to the backend.**
  - How can those be detected via metrics or logs?  Logs from the component or agent based on the failure mode.
  - What are the mitigations for each of those failure modes?  **None.  You must correctly configure the collector for tracing to work.**
  - What are the most useful log messages and what logging levels do they require? **All errors are useful, and are logged as errors (no logging levels required). Failure to initialize exporters (in both controller and collector), failures exporting metrics are the most useful.**
  - What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the
    problem?  **Look at API Server  and collector logs.**

## Implementation History

* [Mutating admission webhook which injects trace context](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/mutating-trace-admission-controller)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/kubernetes/pull/15)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components for 1/24/2019 community demo](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/compare/master...dashpole:tracing)
* KEP merged as provisional on 1/8/2020, including controller tracing
* KEP scoped down to only API Server traces on 5/1/2020

Commit message:

add details on egress with client

keps/sig-instrumentation/0034-distributed-tracing-kep.md, after:

---
title: Tracing API Server Requests
authors:
  - "@Monkeyanator"
  - "@dashpole"
editor: "@dashpole"
owning-sig: sig-instrumentation
participating-sigs:
  - sig-architecture
  - sig-api-machinery
  - sig-scalability
  - sig-cli
reviewers:
  - "@logicalhan"
approvers:
  - "@brancz"
  - "@lavalamp"
creation-date: 2018-12-04
last-updated: 2020-04-29
status: implementable
---

# Tracing API Server Requests

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Definitions](#definitions)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Tracing API Requests](#tracing-api-requests)
  - [Kubectl integration](#kubectl-integration)
  - [Vendor OpenTelemetry and the OT Exporter](#vendor-opentelemetry-and-the-ot-exporter)
  - [Controlling use of the OpenTelemetry library](#controlling-use-of-the-opentelemetry-library)
- [Graduation requirements](#graduation-requirements)
- [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
  - [Other OpenTelemetry Exporters](#other-opentelemetry-exporters)
- [Production Readiness Survey](#production-readiness-survey)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal (KEP) proposes enhancing the API Server to allow tracing requests.


## Motivation

Along with metrics and logs, traces are a useful form of telemetry to aid with debugging incoming requests.  The API Server currently uses a poor-man's form of tracing (see [github.com/kubernetes/utils/trace](https://github.com/kubernetes/utils/tree/master/trace)), but we can make use of distributed tracing to improve the ease of use and enable easier analysis of trace data.  Trace data is structured, providing the detail necessary to debug requests, and context propagation allows plugins, such as admission webhooks, to add to API Server requests.

### Definitions

**Span**: The smallest unit of a trace.  It has a start and end time, and is attached to a single trace.
**Trace**: A collection of Spans which represents a single process.
**Trace Context**: A reference to a Trace that is designed to be propagated across component boundaries.  Sometimes referred to as the "Span Context".  It is can be thought of as a pointer to a parent span that child spans can be attached to.

### Goals

* The API Server generates and exports spans for incoming and outgoing requests.
* The API Server propagates context from incoming requests to outgoing requests.
* Kubectl clients can easily specify that a request should be traced.

### Non-Goals

* Tracing in kubernetes controllers
* Replace existing logging, metrics, or the events API
* Trace operations from all Kubernetes resource types in a generic manner (i.e. without manual instrumentation)
* Change metrics or logging (e.g. to support trace-metric correlation)
* Access control to tracing backends

## Proposal

### Tracing API Requests

We will wrap the API Server's http server and http clients with [othttp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/tree/master/plugin/othttp) to get spans for incoming and outgoing http requests, and add the [otgrpc](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-opentracing/tree/master/go/otgrpc) DialOption to the etcd grpc client.  This generates spans for all sampled incoming requests and propagates context with all client requests.  For incoming requests, this would go below [WithRequestInfo](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9eb097c4b07ea59c674a69e19c1519f0d10f2fa8/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/config.go#L676) in the filter stack, as it must be after authentication and authorization, before the panic filter, and is closest in function to the WithRequestInfo filter.

Note that some clients of the API Server, such as webhooks, may make reentrant calls to the API Server.  To gain the full benefit of tracing, such clients should propagate context with requests back to the API Server.

### Kubectl integration

Fundamentally, a trace is a graph showing the fulfilment of user intent.  To make tracing in kubernetes useful, we need to ensure users have the ability to declare their intent for their request to be traced.  Add a new `--trace` argument to `kubectl`, which generates a new trace context, sets the trace context to be sampled, and uses the context when sending requests to the API Server.  The option is false by default.

### Vendor OpenTelemetry and the OT Exporter

This KEP proposes the use of the [OpenTelemetry tracing framework](https://opentelemetry.io/) to create and export spans to configured backends.

The API Server will use the [OpenTelemetry exporter format](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto), which exports traces to a local port.  This format is compatible with the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector), which allows importing and configuring exporters for trace storage backends to be done out-of-tree in addition to other useful features.  The exporter stores spans in memory, and uses the [batching processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#batching-processor) to batch requests and send them asynchronously.

Add configuration to the API Server required to configure the opentelemetry exporter, including the address and egress proxy to send spans to. The [egress proxy](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190226-network-proxy.md) can be added to the opentelemetry exporter by adding a ContextDialer grpc DialOption similar to the one used by the apiserver's etcd client.

### Controlling use of the OpenTelemetry library

As the community found in the [Metrics Stability Framework KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-instrumentation/20190404-kubernetes-control-plane-metrics-stability.md#kubernetes-control-plane-metrics-stability), having control over how the client libraries are used in kubernetes can enable maintainers to enforce policy and make broad improvements to the quality of telemetry.  To enable future improvements to tracing, we will restrict the direct use of the OpenTelemetry library within the kubernetes code base, and provide wrapped versions of functions we wish to expose in a utility library.

## Graduation requirements

Alpha

- [] Implement tracing of incoming and outgoing http/grpc requests in the kube-apiserver
- [] Add a `--trace` flag to kubectl
- [] E2e testing of apiserver tracing
- [] User-facing documentation

Beta

- [] Benchmark kubernetes components using tracing
- [] Publish documentation on examples of how to use the OT Collector with kubernetes
- [] Scalability testing


## Alternatives considered

### Other OpenTelemetry Exporters

This KEP suggests that we utilize the OpenTelemetry exporter format in all components.  Alternative options include:

1. Add configuration for many exporters in-tree by vendoring multiple "supported" exporters. These exporters are the only compatible backends for tracing in kubernetes.
  a. This places the kubernetes community in the position of curating supported tracing backends
2. Support *both* a curated set of in-tree exporters, and the collector exporter

## Production Readiness Survey

* Feature enablement and rollback
  - How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?  **Feature-gate: APIServerTracing.  The API Server must be restarted to enable/disable exporting spans.**
  - Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e., can we roll
    back the enablement)?  **Yes, the feature gate can be disabled in the API Server**
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime for the control
    plane?  **Yes, the API Server must be restarted with the feature-gate disabled.**
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?  **No.**
  - What happens if a cluster with this feature enabled is rolled back? What happens if it is subsequently upgraded again?  **Rolling back this feature would break the added tracing telemetry, but would not affect the cluster.**
  - Are there tests for this?  **No.  The feature hasn't been developed yet.**
* Scalability
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in any new API calls? **No.**
    Describe them with their impact keeping in mind the [supported limits][]
    (e.g. 5000 nodes per cluster, 100 pods/s churn) focusing mostly on:
     - components listing and/or watching resources they didn't before
     - API calls that may be triggered by changes of some Kubernetes
       resources (e.g. update object X based on changes of object Y)
     - periodic API calls to reconcile state (e.g. periodic fetching state,
       heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in supporting new API types? **No**
    How many objects of that type will be supported (and how that translates
    to limitations for users)?
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in increasing size or count
    of the existing API objects?  **No.**
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in increasing time taken
    by any operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs][] (e.g. by adding
    additional work, introducing new steps in between, etc.)? **Yes.  It will increase API Server request latency by a negligible amount (<1 microsecond) for encoding and decoding the trace contex from headers, and recording spans in memory.  Exporting spans is not in the critical path.**
    Please describe the details if so.
  - Will enabling / using the feature result in non-negligible increase
    of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk IO, ...) in any components?
    Things to keep in mind include: additional in-memory state, additional
    non-trivial computations, excessive access to disks (including increased
    log volume), significant amount of data sent and/or received over
    network, etc. Think through this in both small and large cases, again
    with respect to the [supported limits][].  **The tracing client library has a small, in-memory cache for outgoing spans.**
* Rollout, Upgrade, and Rollback Planning
* Dependencies
  - Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster
    (e.g., a metrics service)? **Yes.  In the current version of the proposal, users can run the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) to configure which backend (e.g. jager, zipkin, etc.) they want telemetry sent to.**
  - How does this feature respond to complete failures of the services on
    which it depends?  **Traces will stop being exported, and components will store spans in memory until the buffer is full.  After the buffer fills up, spans will be dropped.**
  - How does this feature respond to degraded performance or high error rates
    from services on which it depends? **If the bi-directional grpc streaming connection to the collector cannot be established or is broken, the controller retries the connection every 5 minutes (by default).**
* Monitoring requirements
  - How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?  **Operators are generally expected to have access to the trace backend.**
  - How can an operator determine if the feature is functioning properly?
  - What are the service level indicators an operator can use to determine the
    health of the service?  **Error rate of sending traces in the API Server and OpenTelemetry collector.**
  - What are reasonable service level objectives for the feature?  **Not entirely sure, but I would expect at least 99% of spans to be sent successfully, if not more.**
* Troubleshooting
  - What are the known failure modes?  **The API Server is misconfigured, and cannot talk to the collector.  The collector is misconfigured, and can't send traces to the backend.**
  - How can those be detected via metrics or logs?  Logs from the component or agent based on the failure mode.
  - What are the mitigations for each of those failure modes?  **None.  You must correctly configure the collector for tracing to work.**
  - What are the most useful log messages and what logging levels do they require? **All errors are useful, and are logged as errors (no logging levels required). Failure to initialize exporters (in both controller and collector), failures exporting metrics are the most useful.**
  - What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the
    problem?  **Look at API Server  and collector logs.**

## Implementation History

* [Mutating admission webhook which injects trace context](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/mutating-trace-admission-controller)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components](https://github.com/Monkeyanator/kubernetes/pull/15)
* [Instrumentation of Kubernetes components for 1/24/2019 community demo](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/compare/master...dashpole:tracing)
* KEP merged as provisional on 1/8/2020, including controller tracing
* KEP scoped down to only API Server traces on 5/1/2020
