---
title: Kui Graphical Terminal Enhancements
authors:
  - "@starpit"
  - "@paulcastro"
owning-sig: sig-cli
participating-sigs:
  - sig-cli
reviewers:
  - "@pwittrock"
  - "@soltysh"
approvers:
  - "@pwittrock"
  - "@soltysh"
editor: TBD
creation-date: 2019-11-14
last-updated: 2020-01-30
status: implemented
see-also:

replaces:

superseded-by:

---

# Kubectl Graphical Plugins

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
    - [Examples](#examples)
      - [Alpha -&gt; Beta Graduation](#alpha---beta-graduation)
      - [Beta -&gt; GA Graduation](#beta---ga-graduation)
      - [Removing a deprecated flag](#removing-a-deprecated-flag)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This enhancement offers a kubectl plugin framework that allows
`kubectl` and `kubectl` plugins the ability to have graphical popups
in response to normal CLI commands. To provide a popup-from-terminal
experience, this project leverages the Kui project.

## Motivation

CLIs are highly desired, for their speed, ease of sharing and
scripting, and generally not getting in the way of development and
operational tasks. However, visualizations, even simple ones, can go a
long way with assisting in common kubernetes tasks.

Today, the `kubectl` CLI and its plugins exist separately from the
visual experience provided by browser-based consoles. You must chose
to inhabit (using, and extending) one world or the other.

We believe it is possible to bring the two closer together. So that,
as a tool user, transitions from a terminal world into a graphical
world are fast, and only at my choosing; and, as a tool developer, I
can enhance the world of CLIs, in a way that can be reused, if needed,
in a browser context: a framework for CLI-driven graphical tools.

### Goals

1) Deliver a `kui` plugin for kubectl that has graphical popups that enhance the user experience
2) Deliver a `kui-core` framework with a well defined API to facilitate development of plugins such as `kui`.
3) Deliver a `kui-template` repository that plugin developers can opt to use as a starting point for developing their own graphical plugins.
4) That such graphical plugins can leverage `krew` for installation

### Non-Goals

- We limit the scope such that graphical plugins and the required
  framework are installed and used with the discretion of our
  users. In particular, there is no need to replace existing
  non-graphical `kubectl` plugins that work well with purely textual
  output.
- We desire no mandates for radical updates or parallel constructs to
  `krew` in order to support graphical plugins. We will base any
  krew-focused work on the goal of minimal perturbation.

## Proposal

An implementation of the first deliverable is available at
[https://github.com/kui-shell/plugin-kubeui](https://github.com/kui-shell/plugin-kubeui).

An implementation of the second deliverable is available at
[https://github.com/IBM/kui](https://github.com/IBM/kui).

An implementation of the third deliverable is available at
[https://github.com/kui-shell/plugin-kubectl-boilerplate](https://github.com/kui-shell/plugin-kubectl-boilerplate).

The minimal krew integration should only depend upon support for
symlinks in its tarball extraction logic. This is due to the way
Electron executables are structured on macOS. In this scheme, which we
refer to as producing and distributing "fat" plugins, each plugin will
contain its own copy of kui-core, including all of Electron (and its
attendant copy of Chromium).

An alternate krew integration story, which we refer to as the "thin
plugin" strategy, would require development of a chain loader. When
installing a thin plugin, the plugin would install, if needed, the
kui-loader plugin. This would:

1) allow for very small plugin downloads;
2) maintain the ability for plugins to pin themselves to a particular version of electron and kui-core;
3) avoid having a separate copy of chromium in memory for every plugin window.

A prototype of such a chain loader is here:
[https://github.com/kui-shell/kask](https://github.com/kui-shell/kask).


### Risks and Mitigations

- Mac OS X utilizes symlinks to link to platform frameworks.  Symlinks
  could be a security concern so we would need a way to ensure links
  are contained in "safe" directories

## Design Details

We refer you to the repository links above. In addition, we have API
documentation for kui-core available
[here](https://github.com/IBM/kui/wiki).

### Test Plan

The kui-core and kui repositories have a Travis-based test story in
place. As part of kui-core, there is a set of test APIs that plugin
developers can use that substantially reduce the development effort
required to cover their plugin with tests.

### Graduation Criteria

TBD

#### Examples

We also have a log plugin written using the kui-core framework: [logui](https://github.com/kui-shell/plugin-logui).

We also have a plugin for OpenWhisk: [oui](https://github.com/kui-shell/oui).

##### Alpha -> Beta Graduation


##### Beta -> GA Graduation


##### Removing a deprecated flag


### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy


### Version Skew Strategy



## Implementation History



