keps/sig-cloud-provider/2436-controller-manager-leader-migration/README.md, before:

# Controller Manager Leader Migration

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional)
    - [Migration Configuration](#migration-configuration)
    - [Default LeaderMigrationConfiguration](#default-leadermigrationconfiguration)
    - [Component Flags](#component-flags)
    - [Example Walkthrough of Controller Migration with Default Configuration](#example-walkthrough-of-controller-migration-with-default-configuration)
      - [Enable Leader Migration on Components](#enable-leader-migration-on-components)
      - [Upgrade the Control Plane](#upgrade-the-control-plane)
      - [Disable Leader Migration](#disable-leader-migration)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
      - [Alpha -&gt; Beta Graduation](#alpha---beta-graduation)
      - [Beta -&gt; GA Graduation](#beta---ga-graduation)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
  - [Feature Enablement and Rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [X] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [X] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [X] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [X] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [X] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [X] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [X] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [X] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Support a migration process for large scale and highly available Kubernetes clusters using the in-tree cloud providers (via kube-controller-manager and kubelet) to their out-of-tree
equivalents (via cloud-controller-manager).

## Motivation

SIG Cloud Provider is in the process of migrating the cloud specific code from the core Kubernetes tree to external packages
and removing them from the kube-controller-manager, where they are today embedded. Once the extraction has been completed, existing users
running older versions of Kubernetes need a process to migrate their existing clusters to use the new cloud-controller-manager component
with minimal risk.

This KEP proposes a mechanism in which HA clusters can safely migrate “cloud specific” controllers between the
kube-controller-manager and the cloud-controller-manager via a shared resource lock between the two components. The pattern proposed
in this KEP should be reusable by other components in the future if desired.

The migration mechanism outlined in this KEP should only be used for Kubernetes clusters that have _very_ strict requirements on control plane availability.
If a cluster can tolerate short intervals of downtime, it is recommended to update your cluster with in-tree cloud providers disabled, and then deploy
the respective out-of-tree cloud-controller-manager.

### Goals

* Define migration process for large scale, highly available clusters to migrate from the in-tree cloud provider mechanism, to their out-of-tree equivalents.

### Non-Goals

* Removing cloud provider code from the core Kubernetes tree, this effort is separate and is covered in [KEP-removing-in-tree-providers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-cloud-provider/20190125-removing-in-tree-providers.md)
* Improving the scalability of controllers by running controllers across multiple components (with or without leader election).
* Migrating cloud-based volume plugins to CSI. This is a separate effort led by SIG Storage. See [this proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/design-proposals/storage/csi-migration.md) for more details.

## Proposal

Today, the kube-controller-manager (KCM) and cloud-controller-manager (CCM) run independent of each other.
This means that both the KCM or the CCM can run the cloud specific control loops for a given cluster.
For a highly available control plane to migrate from running only the KCM to running both the KCM and
the CCM requires that only one process in the control plane is running the cloud specific controllers.
This becomes non-trivial when introducing the CCM that runs overlapping controllers with the KCM.

For environments that can tolerate downtime, the control plane can be taken down in order to
reconfigure components to use the CCM, and then bring the control plane back up. This ensures that only
1 component can be running the set of cloud controllers. For environments that have stricter requirements
for uptime, some level of coordination is required between the two components to ensure that upgrading
control planes does not result in running the same controller in more than one place while also accounting for version skew.

In order to coordinate the cloud-specific controllers across the KCM and the CCM, this KEP proposes a
_primary_ and N configurable _secondary_ (a.k.a migration) leader election locks in the KCM and the CCM.
The primary lock represents the current leader election resource lock in the KCM and the CCM. The set of
secondary locks are defined by the cloud provider and run in parallel to the primary locks. For a migration
lock defined by the cloud provider, the cloud provider also determines the set of controllers run within the
migration lock and the controller manager it will run in - either the CCM or the KCM.

The properties of the migration lock are:
  * must have a unique name
  * the set of controllers in the lock is immutable.
  * no two migration locks should have overlapping controllers
  * the controller manager where the lock runs can change across releases.
  * for a minor release it must run exclusively in one type of controller manager - KCM or CCM.

During migration, either the KCM or CCM may have multiple migration locks, though for performance reasons no more than 2 locks is recommended.

Let's say we are migrating the service, route, and nodeipam controllers from the KCM to the CCM across Kubernetes versions, say v1.17 to v1.18.
In v1.17, the cloud provider would define a new migration lock called `cloud-network-controller-migration` which specifies those controllers to run
inside the KCM (see Figure 1). As a result, in v1.17 those controllers would run in the KCM but under the `cloud-network-controller-migration` leader election.
To migrate to the CCM for v1.18, the cloud provider would update the `cloud-network-controller-migration` lock to now run in the CCM (see Figure 2).
During a control plane upgrade, the cloud network controllers may still run in one of the KCMs that are still on v1.17. A 1.17 KCM holding the lock
will prevent any of the v1.18 CCMs from claiming the lock. When the current holder of the lock goes down, one of the controller managers eligible will acquire lock.

<br/>
<br/>
<br/>

![example network controllers migration v1.17](/keps/sig-cloud-provider/991-cloud-controller-migration/migrating-cloud-controllers-v1-17.png)
<br/>
**Figure 1**: Example of migrating cloud network controllers in v1.17

<br/>
<br/>
<br/>

![example network controllers migration v1.18](/keps/sig-cloud-provider/991-cloud-controller-migration/migrating-cloud-controllers-v1-18.png)
<br/>
**Figure 2**: Example of migrating cloud network controllers in v1.18



### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Migration Configuration

The migration lock will be configured by defining new API types that will then be passed into the KCM and CCM.

```go
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
// LeaderMigrationConfiguration provides versioned configuration for all migrating leader locks.
type LeaderMigrationConfiguration struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	// LeaderName is the name of the resource under which the controllers will be run.
	LeaderName string `json:"leaderName"`

	// ResourceLock indicates the resource object type that will be used to lock
    // Must be either "leases" or "endpoints", defaults to 'leases'
    // No other types (e.g. "endpointsleases" or "configmapsleases") are allowed
    ResourceLock string

// ControllerLeaders contains a list of migrating leader lock configurations
ControllerLeaders []ControllerLeaderConfiguration `json:"controllerLeaders"`
}

// ControllerLeaderConfiguration provides the configuration for a migrating leader lock.
type ControllerLeaderConfiguration struct {
// Name is the name of the controller being migrated
// E.g. service-controller, route-controller, cloud-node-controller, etc
Name string `json:"name"`

// Component is the name of the component in which the controller will be running.
// E.g. kube-controller-manager, cloud-controller-manager, etc
Component string `json:"component"`
}
```

#### Default LeaderMigrationConfiguration

The `staging/controller-manager` package will provide `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`
each a default `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` that represents the situation where the controller manager is running with
default assignments of controllers and lock type selection.

Please refer to [an workthough](#example-walkthrough-of-controller-migration-with-default-configuration)
of an example cloud controllers migration from KCM to CCM that use the default configuration.

The default values must be only used when no configuration file is specified. If a custom configuration file is
specified to either controller manager, the specified configuration will completely replace default value for the
corresponding controller manager.

#### Component Flags

Both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager` will get support for the following two flags for Leader
Migration. First, `--enable-leader-migration` is a boolean flag which defaults to `false` that indicates whether Leader
Migration is enabled. Second, `--leader-migration-config` is an optional flag that accepts a path to a file containing
the `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` type serialized in yaml.

If `--enable-leader-migration` is `true` but `--leader-migration-config` flag is empty or not set, the
default `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` for corresponding controller manager will be used.

If `--enable-leader-migration` is not set or set to `false`, but `--leader-migration-config` is set and not empty, the
controller manager will print an error at `FATAL` level and exit immediately. Additionally,
if `--leader-migration-config` is set but the configuration file cannot be read or parsed, the controller manager will
log the failure at `FATAL` level and exit immediately.

#### Example Walkthrough of Controller Migration with Default Configuration

This is an example of migrating a KCM-only Kubernetes 1.21 control plane to KCM + CCM 1.22.

After the upgrade, all cloud controllers will be moved from the KCM to the KCM. We assume KCM and CCM are running with
default controller assignments, namely, in 1.21, KCM runs `route-controller`, `service-controller`
, `cloud-node-controller`, and `cloud-nodelifecycle-controller`, and in 1.22, CCM instead will run all the 4
controllers.

If KCM and CCM are not running with the default controller assignments, a custom configuration file can be specified
with `--leader-migration-config`. However, this example only covers the simple case of using default configuration.

At the beginning, KCM should not have `--enable-leader-migration` or `--leader-migration-config` set, but it should
have `--cloud-provider` already set to an existing cloud provider (e.g. `--cloud-provider=gce`). At this point, KCM
runs `route-controller`, `service-controller`, `cloud-node-controller`, and `cloud-nodelifecycle-controller`. CCM is not
yet deployed.

##### Enable Leader Migration on Components

The provided default configuration will be equivalent to the following:

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: service-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-nodelifecycle-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
```

First, within 1.21 control plane, update the `kube-controller-manager` to set `--enable-leader-migration` but
not `--leader-migration-config`, this flag enables Leader Migration with default configuration, which prepares KCM to
participate in the migration.

##### Upgrade the Control Plane

Upgrade each node of the control plane to 1.22 with the following updates:

- KCM has neither `--enable-leader-migration` or `--leader-migration-config`
- KCM has no cloud provider enabled with`--cloud-provider=`
- CCM deployed with `--enable-leader-migration`
- CCM has its `--cloud-provider` set to the correct cloud provider

After upgrade, CCM will run `route-controller`, `service-controller`, `cloud-node-controller`,
and `cloud-nodelifecycle-controller`. The Leader Migration support will ensure CCM cleanly take out these controllers
during the control plane upgrade.

As a reference, the provided default configuration in version 1.22 should have the `component` field of all affected
controllers changed to `cloud-controller-manager`. The resulting default configuration should be equivalent to the
following:

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: service-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-nodelifecycle-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
```

Please take note on how component names across both versions differs for each controller.

##### Disable Leader Migration

Once all nodes in the control plane are upgraded to 1.22, disable leader migration on the `cloud-controller-manager` by
unsetting the `--enable-migration-config` flag.

### Risks and Mitigations

* Increased apiserver load due to new leader election resource per migration configuration.
* User error could result in cloud controllers not running in any component at all.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

- Unit Testing:
  - test resource reading, parsing, validation
  - test calculation of leader differences.
  - test all helpers
- Integration Testing
  - test resource registration, parsing, and validation against the Schema APIs
  - test interactions with the leader election APIs
- E2E Testing
  - In a single-node control plane with leader election setting, test control plane upgrade, assert controller managers
    become health and ready after upgrade
  - In a multi-node control plane setting, test control plane upgrade, assert availability throughout the upgrade

### Graduation Criteria

##### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

Leader migration configuration is tested end-to-end on at least 2 cloud providers.

##### Beta -> GA Graduation

Leader migration configuration works on all in-tree cloud providers.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

See [Example Walkthrough of Controller Migration](#example-walkthrough-of-controller-migratoin) for upgrade strategy.
Clusters can be downgraded and migration can be disabled by reversing the steps in the upgrade strategy assuming the behavior of each controller
does not change incompatibly across those versions.

### Version Skew Strategy

Version skew is handled as long as the leader name is consistent across all control plane nodes during upgrade.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [X] Other
  - Describe the mechanism: this feature must be explicitly enabled by `--enable-leader-migration` flag
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control plane? No
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or re-provisioning of a node? No

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No. The user must explicitly add `--enable-leader-migration` flag to enable this feature. If the user enables this
feature without providing a configuration, the default configuration will reflect default situation and "just works".

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

No. The feature is enabled and disabled solely with a flag

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

Yes. Unit & integration tests include flag/configuration parsing. E2E test will have cases with the feature enabled and
disabled.

## Implementation History

- 07-25-2019 `Summary` and `Motivation` sections were merged signaling SIG acceptance
- 01-21-2019 Implementation details are proposed to move KEP to `implementable` state.
- 09-30-2020 `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` and `ControllerLeaderConfiguration` schemas merged as #94205.
- 11-04-2020 Registration of both types merged as #96133
- 12-28-2020 Parsing and validation merged as #96226

## Drawbacks

A single-node control plane does not need this feature. If downtime is allowed during control plane upgrade, KCM and CCM
can have no migration mechanism at all.

## Alternatives

Change all controllers so that they can handle a situation where two instances of the same controller are running in
both KCM and CCM. This requires a massive change to all controllers and potentially require other kinds of
synchronization. It would be better that the controller manager provides migration mechanism instead of relying on each
controller.

Commit message:

use a feature gate instead of a sole flag.

keps/sig-cloud-provider/2436-controller-manager-leader-migration/README.md, after:

# Controller Manager Leader Migration

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional)
    - [Migration Configuration](#migration-configuration)
    - [Default LeaderMigrationConfiguration](#default-leadermigrationconfiguration)
    - [Component Flags](#component-flags)
    - [Example Walkthrough of Controller Migration with Default Configuration](#example-walkthrough-of-controller-migration-with-default-configuration)
      - [Enable Leader Migration on Components](#enable-leader-migration-on-components)
      - [Upgrade the Control Plane](#upgrade-the-control-plane)
      - [Disable Leader Migration](#disable-leader-migration)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
      - [Alpha -&gt; Beta Graduation](#alpha---beta-graduation)
      - [Beta -&gt; GA Graduation](#beta---ga-graduation)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
  - [Feature Enablement and Rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [X] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [X] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [X] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [X] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [X] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [X] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [X] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [X] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Support a migration process for large scale and highly available Kubernetes clusters using the in-tree cloud providers (via kube-controller-manager and kubelet) to their out-of-tree
equivalents (via cloud-controller-manager).

## Motivation

SIG Cloud Provider is in the process of migrating the cloud specific code from the core Kubernetes tree to external packages
and removing them from the kube-controller-manager, where they are today embedded. Once the extraction has been completed, existing users
running older versions of Kubernetes need a process to migrate their existing clusters to use the new cloud-controller-manager component
with minimal risk.

This KEP proposes a mechanism in which HA clusters can safely migrate “cloud specific” controllers between the
kube-controller-manager and the cloud-controller-manager via a shared resource lock between the two components. The pattern proposed
in this KEP should be reusable by other components in the future if desired.

The migration mechanism outlined in this KEP should only be used for Kubernetes clusters that have _very_ strict requirements on control plane availability.
If a cluster can tolerate short intervals of downtime, it is recommended to update your cluster with in-tree cloud providers disabled, and then deploy
the respective out-of-tree cloud-controller-manager.

### Goals

* Define migration process for large scale, highly available clusters to migrate from the in-tree cloud provider mechanism, to their out-of-tree equivalents.

### Non-Goals

* Removing cloud provider code from the core Kubernetes tree, this effort is separate and is covered in [KEP-removing-in-tree-providers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-cloud-provider/20190125-removing-in-tree-providers.md)
* Improving the scalability of controllers by running controllers across multiple components (with or without leader election).
* Migrating cloud-based volume plugins to CSI. This is a separate effort led by SIG Storage. See [this proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/design-proposals/storage/csi-migration.md) for more details.

## Proposal

Today, the kube-controller-manager (KCM) and cloud-controller-manager (CCM) run independent of each other.
This means that both the KCM or the CCM can run the cloud specific control loops for a given cluster.
For a highly available control plane to migrate from running only the KCM to running both the KCM and
the CCM requires that only one process in the control plane is running the cloud specific controllers.
This becomes non-trivial when introducing the CCM that runs overlapping controllers with the KCM.

For environments that can tolerate downtime, the control plane can be taken down in order to
reconfigure components to use the CCM, and then bring the control plane back up. This ensures that only
1 component can be running the set of cloud controllers. For environments that have stricter requirements
for uptime, some level of coordination is required between the two components to ensure that upgrading
control planes does not result in running the same controller in more than one place while also accounting for version skew.

In order to coordinate the cloud-specific controllers across the KCM and the CCM, this KEP proposes a
_primary_ and N configurable _secondary_ (a.k.a migration) leader election locks in the KCM and the CCM.
The primary lock represents the current leader election resource lock in the KCM and the CCM. The set of
secondary locks are defined by the cloud provider and run in parallel to the primary locks. For a migration
lock defined by the cloud provider, the cloud provider also determines the set of controllers run within the
migration lock and the controller manager it will run in - either the CCM or the KCM.

The properties of the migration lock are:
  * must have a unique name
  * the set of controllers in the lock is immutable.
  * no two migration locks should have overlapping controllers
  * the controller manager where the lock runs can change across releases.
  * for a minor release it must run exclusively in one type of controller manager - KCM or CCM.

During migration, either the KCM or CCM may have multiple migration locks, though for performance reasons no more than 2 locks is recommended.

Let's say we are migrating the service, route, and nodeipam controllers from the KCM to the CCM across Kubernetes versions, say v1.17 to v1.18.
In v1.17, the cloud provider would define a new migration lock called `cloud-network-controller-migration` which specifies those controllers to run
inside the KCM (see Figure 1). As a result, in v1.17 those controllers would run in the KCM but under the `cloud-network-controller-migration` leader election.
To migrate to the CCM for v1.18, the cloud provider would update the `cloud-network-controller-migration` lock to now run in the CCM (see Figure 2).
During a control plane upgrade, the cloud network controllers may still run in one of the KCMs that are still on v1.17. A 1.17 KCM holding the lock
will prevent any of the v1.18 CCMs from claiming the lock. When the current holder of the lock goes down, one of the controller managers eligible will acquire lock.

<br/>
<br/>
<br/>

![example network controllers migration v1.17](/keps/sig-cloud-provider/991-cloud-controller-migration/migrating-cloud-controllers-v1-17.png)
<br/>
**Figure 1**: Example of migrating cloud network controllers in v1.17

<br/>
<br/>
<br/>

![example network controllers migration v1.18](/keps/sig-cloud-provider/991-cloud-controller-migration/migrating-cloud-controllers-v1-18.png)
<br/>
**Figure 2**: Example of migrating cloud network controllers in v1.18



### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Migration Configuration

The migration lock will be configured by defining new API types that will then be passed into the KCM and CCM.

```go
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
// LeaderMigrationConfiguration provides versioned configuration for all migrating leader locks.
type LeaderMigrationConfiguration struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	// LeaderName is the name of the resource under which the controllers will be run.
	LeaderName string `json:"leaderName"`

	// ResourceLock indicates the resource object type that will be used to lock
    // Must be either "leases" or "endpoints", defaults to 'leases'
    // No other types (e.g. "endpointsleases" or "configmapsleases") are allowed
    ResourceLock string

// ControllerLeaders contains a list of migrating leader lock configurations
ControllerLeaders []ControllerLeaderConfiguration `json:"controllerLeaders"`
}

// ControllerLeaderConfiguration provides the configuration for a migrating leader lock.
type ControllerLeaderConfiguration struct {
// Name is the name of the controller being migrated
// E.g. service-controller, route-controller, cloud-node-controller, etc
Name string `json:"name"`

// Component is the name of the component in which the controller will be running.
// E.g. kube-controller-manager, cloud-controller-manager, etc
Component string `json:"component"`
}
```

#### Default LeaderMigrationConfiguration

The `staging/controller-manager` package will provide `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager`
each a default `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` that represents the situation where the controller manager is running with
default assignments of controllers and lock type selection.

Please refer to [an workthough](#example-walkthrough-of-controller-migration-with-default-configuration)
of an example cloud controllers migration from KCM to CCM that use the default configuration.

The default values must be only used when no configuration file is specified. If a custom configuration file is
specified to either controller manager, the specified configuration will completely replace default value for the
corresponding controller manager.

#### Component Flags

Both `kube-controller-manager` and `cloud-controller-manager` will get support for the following two flags for Leader
Migration. First, `--enable-leader-migration` is a boolean flag which defaults to `false` that indicates whether Leader
Migration is enabled. Second, `--leader-migration-config` is an optional flag that accepts a path to a file containing
the `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` type serialized in yaml.

If `--enable-leader-migration` is `true` but `--leader-migration-config` flag is empty or not set, the
default `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` for corresponding controller manager will be used.

If `--enable-leader-migration` is not set or set to `false`, but `--leader-migration-config` is set and not empty, the
controller manager will print an error at `FATAL` level and exit immediately. Additionally,
if `--leader-migration-config` is set but the configuration file cannot be read or parsed, the controller manager will
log the failure at `FATAL` level and exit immediately.

#### Example Walkthrough of Controller Migration with Default Configuration

This is an example of migrating a KCM-only Kubernetes 1.21 control plane to KCM + CCM 1.22.

After the upgrade, all cloud controllers will be moved from the KCM to the KCM. We assume KCM and CCM are running with
default controller assignments, namely, in 1.21, KCM runs `route-controller`, `service-controller`
, `cloud-node-controller`, and `cloud-nodelifecycle-controller`, and in 1.22, CCM instead will run all the 4
controllers.

If KCM and CCM are not running with the default controller assignments, a custom configuration file can be specified
with `--leader-migration-config`. However, this example only covers the simple case of using default configuration.

At the beginning, KCM should not have `--enable-leader-migration` or `--leader-migration-config` set, but it should
have `--cloud-provider` already set to an existing cloud provider (e.g. `--cloud-provider=gce`). At this point, KCM
runs `route-controller`, `service-controller`, `cloud-node-controller`, and `cloud-nodelifecycle-controller`. CCM is not
yet deployed.

##### Enable Leader Migration on Components

The provided default configuration will be equivalent to the following:

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: service-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-nodelifecycle-controller
    component: kube-controller-manager
```

First, within 1.21 control plane, update the `kube-controller-manager` to set `--enable-leader-migration`
and `--feature-gate=ControllerManagerLeaderMigration` (this enables `ControllerManagerLeaderMigration` feature gate) but
not `--leader-migration-config`, this flag enables Leader Migration with default configuration, which prepares KCM to
participate in the migration.

##### Upgrade the Control Plane

Upgrade each node of the control plane to 1.22 with the following updates:

- KCM has neither `--enable-leader-migration` or `--leader-migration-config`
- KCM has no cloud provider enabled with`--cloud-provider=`
- CCM deployed with `--enable-leader-migration`
- CCM has its `--cloud-provider` set to the correct cloud provider

After upgrade, CCM will run `route-controller`, `service-controller`, `cloud-node-controller`,
and `cloud-nodelifecycle-controller`. The Leader Migration support will ensure CCM cleanly take out these controllers
during the control plane upgrade.

As a reference, the provided default configuration in version 1.22 should have the `component` field of all affected
controllers changed to `cloud-controller-manager`. The resulting default configuration should be equivalent to the
following:

```yaml
kind: LeaderMigrationConfiguration
apiVersion: v1alpha1
leaderName: cloud-provider-extraction-migration
resourceLock: leases
controllerLeaders:
  - name: route-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: service-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-node-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
  - name: cloud-nodelifecycle-controller
    component: cloud-controller-manager
```

Please take note on how component names across both versions differs for each controller.

##### Disable Leader Migration

Once all nodes in the control plane are upgraded to 1.22, disable leader migration on the `cloud-controller-manager` by
unsetting the `--enable-migration-config` flag.

### Risks and Mitigations

* Increased apiserver load due to new leader election resource per migration configuration.
* User error could result in cloud controllers not running in any component at all.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

- Unit Testing:
  - test resource reading, parsing, validation
  - test calculation of leader differences.
  - test all helpers
- Integration Testing
  - test resource registration, parsing, and validation against the Schema APIs
  - test interactions with the leader election APIs
- E2E Testing
  - In a single-node control plane with leader election setting, test control plane upgrade, assert controller managers
    become health and ready after upgrade
  - In a multi-node control plane setting, test control plane upgrade, assert availability throughout the upgrade

### Graduation Criteria

##### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

Leader migration configuration is tested end-to-end on at least 2 cloud providers.

##### Beta -> GA Graduation

Leader migration configuration works on all in-tree cloud providers.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

See [Example Walkthrough of Controller Migration](#example-walkthrough-of-controller-migratoin) for upgrade strategy.
Clusters can be downgraded and migration can be disabled by reversing the steps in the upgrade strategy assuming the behavior of each controller
does not change incompatibly across those versions.

### Version Skew Strategy

Version skew is handled as long as the leader name is consistent across all control plane nodes during upgrade.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `ControllerManagerLeaderMigration`
  - Components depending on the feature gate: `cloud-controller-manager` and `kube-controller-manager`

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No. The user must explicitly add `--enable-leader-migration` flag to enable this feature. If the user enables this
feature without providing a configuration, the default configuration will reflect default situation and "just works".

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes. Once the feature is enabled via feature gate, it can be disabled by unsetting `--enable-leader-migration` on KCM
and CCM.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

Yes. Unit & integration tests include flag/configuration parsing. E2E test will have cases with the feature enabled and
disabled.

## Implementation History

- 07-25-2019 `Summary` and `Motivation` sections were merged signaling SIG acceptance
- 01-21-2019 Implementation details are proposed to move KEP to `implementable` state.
- 09-30-2020 `LeaderMigrationConfiguration` and `ControllerLeaderConfiguration` schemas merged as #94205.
- 11-04-2020 Registration of both types merged as #96133
- 12-28-2020 Parsing and validation merged as #96226

## Drawbacks

A single-node control plane does not need this feature. If downtime is allowed during control plane upgrade, KCM and CCM
can have no migration mechanism at all.

## Alternatives

Change all controllers so that they can handle a situation where two instances of the same controller are running in
both KCM and CCM. This requires a massive change to all controllers and potentially require other kinds of
synchronization. It would be better that the controller manager provides migration mechanism instead of relying on each
controller.
