keps/sig-architecture/1618-conformance-profiles/README.md, before:

<!--
**Note:** When your KEP is complete, all of these comment blocks should be removed.

To get started with this template:

- [x] **Pick a hosting SIG.**
  Make sure that the problem space is something the SIG is interested in taking
  up.  KEPs should not be checked in without a sponsoring SIG.
- [x] **Create an issue in kubernetes/enhancements**
  When filing an enhancement tracking issue, please ensure to complete all
  fields in that template.  One of the fields asks for a link to the KEP.  You
  can leave that blank until this KEP is filed, and then go back to the
  enhancement and add the link.
- [x] **Make a copy of this template directory.**
  Copy this template into the owning SIG's directory and name it
  `NNNN-short-descriptive-title`, where `NNNN` is the issue number (with no
  leading-zero padding) assigned to your enhancement above.
- [x] **Fill out as much of the kep.yaml file as you can.**
  At minimum, you should fill in the "title", "authors", "owning-sig",
  "status", and date-related fields.
- [ ] **Fill out this file as best you can.**
  At minimum, you should fill in the "Summary", and "Motivation" sections.
  These should be easy if you've preflighted the idea of the KEP with the
  appropriate SIG(s).
- [ ] **Create a PR for this KEP.**
  Assign it to people in the SIG that are sponsoring this process.
- [ ] **Merge early and iterate.**
  Avoid getting hung up on specific details and instead aim to get the goals of
  the KEP clarified and merged quickly.  The best way to do this is to just
  start with the high-level sections and fill out details incrementally in
  subsequent PRs.

Just because a KEP is merged does not mean it is complete or approved.  Any KEP
marked as a `provisional` is a working document and subject to change.  You can
denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused.  If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement", for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example.  If there are
new details that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP.  Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable` or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable` must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If any of those approvers is no longer appropriate than changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross cutting KEPs).
-->
# KEP-1618: Conformance profiles

<!--
This is the title of your KEP.  Keep it short, simple, and descriptive.  A good
title can help communicate what the KEP is and should be considered as part of
any review.
-->

<!--
A table of contents is helpful for quickly jumping to sections of a KEP and for
highlighting any additional information provided beyond the standard KEP
template.

Ensure the TOC is wrapped with
  <code>&lt;!-- toc --&rt;&lt;!-- /toc --&rt;</code>
tags, and then generate with `hack/update-toc.sh`.
-->

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories (optional)](#user-stories-optional)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Story 2](#story-2)
  - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Infrastructure Needed (optional)](#infrastructure-needed-optional)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

<!--
**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an
issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release
milestone **before the [Enhancement Freeze](https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core
Kubernetes i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release
Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These
checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.
-->

- [ ] Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high quality user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap.  It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself.  KEP editors, SIG Docs, and SIG PM
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.
-->

Currently there is a single set of conformance tests which are used to cover
all vendor and cloud provider Kubernetes offerings. Any given offering must
pass all conformance tests in order to be conforming. Therefore, the conformance
tests are limited to non-optional, GA features, in order to avoid excluding
offerings that do not implement an optional feature.

However, to meet the overall goal of the program - workload portability - it is
necessary to ensure that optional features, when available, are implemented in a
consistent manner. This KEP proposes the use of sets of functionality
(behaviors), referred to as “profiles”, and the mechanisms used to define and
validate those profiles.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users.  The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports][] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

The current set of conforming behaviors represents only a small subset of
Kubernetes functionality. This means that users and software packagers cannot
simply rely on the statement that a vendor’s offering is “Certified Kubernetes”
to know that the software will run successfully. For instance, an application
packaged as a Helm chart may use a PersistentVolume. Because that feature is not
part of the conformance program, there are valid, Certified Kubernetes
distributions that do not support it, and therefore the application deployment
will not succeed.

Even as we work to expand those behaviors to include all non-optional, GA
features, there is a substantial amount of functionality that may not apply to
all cluster deployments. For example, edge use cases may intentionally not offer
any stateful services. It would be beneficial for those deploying applications
to easily identify sets of functionality that are needed for their application,
and confirm that a given vendor offering (if not a specific cluster) is able to
support the application.

In this context, “optional” may be from a given user's point of view. For
example, the smallest, “base” profile should provide functionality that at a
minimum is capable of running stateless user workloads. From this user’s point
of view, cluster administration functions are not required.

Profiles also support a simplified model for determining if a given application
that has been packaged to run on Kubernetes (e.g., in a Helm chart) is able to
run on a given cluster. If clusters are classified into a small (~5-10) number
of profiles that define broad functional boundaries, applications will be able
to document the profiles required in order for them to run.

### Goals

 * Design and implement a mechanism to express profiles in the conformance
   behavior definitions.
 * Design and implement a mechanism to validate whether a cluster conforms to
   each profile.
 * Document guidance on how to choose the scope of individual profiles.
 * Document guidance on how to decide the profile in which a new feature
   belongs.
 * Define a base profile and at least one other profile.

### Non-Goals

 * Define a complete set of profiles that covers all behaviors. This is an
   ongoing effort for the conformance subproject.
 * Complete all tests to validate all profiles. This is an ongoing effort for
   the conformance subproject.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation.  The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system.  The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

#### Story 2

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above.
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate.  Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed and by whom?

Consider including folks that also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable.  This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets.  If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Test Plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all of the test cases, just the general strategy.  Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation and anything particularly
challenging to test should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations).  Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

### Graduation Criteria

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Define graduation milestones.

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, or as something else. The KEP
should keep this high-level with a focus on what signals will be looked at to
determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning),
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general, we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless how the
functionality is accessed.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

- N examples of real world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least 2 releases between beta and
GA/stable, since there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

#### Removing a deprecated flag

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality which deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include [conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md
-->

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade in order to keep previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the life cycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider and why did you rule them out?  These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

## Infrastructure Needed (optional)

<!--
Use this section if you need things from the project/SIG.  Examples include a
new subproject, repos requested, github details.  Listing these here allows a
SIG to get the process for these resources started right away.
-->

Commit message:

Add some user stories for conformance profiles

keps/sig-architecture/1618-conformance-profiles/README.md, after:

<!--
**Note:** When your KEP is complete, all of these comment blocks should be removed.

To get started with this template:

- [x] **Pick a hosting SIG.**
  Make sure that the problem space is something the SIG is interested in taking
  up.  KEPs should not be checked in without a sponsoring SIG.
- [x] **Create an issue in kubernetes/enhancements**
  When filing an enhancement tracking issue, please ensure to complete all
  fields in that template.  One of the fields asks for a link to the KEP.  You
  can leave that blank until this KEP is filed, and then go back to the
  enhancement and add the link.
- [x] **Make a copy of this template directory.**
  Copy this template into the owning SIG's directory and name it
  `NNNN-short-descriptive-title`, where `NNNN` is the issue number (with no
  leading-zero padding) assigned to your enhancement above.
- [x] **Fill out as much of the kep.yaml file as you can.**
  At minimum, you should fill in the "title", "authors", "owning-sig",
  "status", and date-related fields.
- [ ] **Fill out this file as best you can.**
  At minimum, you should fill in the "Summary", and "Motivation" sections.
  These should be easy if you've preflighted the idea of the KEP with the
  appropriate SIG(s).
- [ ] **Create a PR for this KEP.**
  Assign it to people in the SIG that are sponsoring this process.
- [ ] **Merge early and iterate.**
  Avoid getting hung up on specific details and instead aim to get the goals of
  the KEP clarified and merged quickly.  The best way to do this is to just
  start with the high-level sections and fill out details incrementally in
  subsequent PRs.

Just because a KEP is merged does not mean it is complete or approved.  Any KEP
marked as a `provisional` is a working document and subject to change.  You can
denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused.  If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement", for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example.  If there are
new details that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP.  Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable` or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable` must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If any of those approvers is no longer appropriate than changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross cutting KEPs).
-->
# KEP-1618: Conformance profiles

<!--
This is the title of your KEP.  Keep it short, simple, and descriptive.  A good
title can help communicate what the KEP is and should be considered as part of
any review.
-->

<!--
A table of contents is helpful for quickly jumping to sections of a KEP and for
highlighting any additional information provided beyond the standard KEP
template.

Ensure the TOC is wrapped with
  <code>&lt;!-- toc --&rt;&lt;!-- /toc --&rt;</code>
tags, and then generate with `hack/update-toc.sh`.
-->

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories (optional)](#user-stories-optional)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Story 2](#story-2)
  - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Infrastructure Needed (optional)](#infrastructure-needed-optional)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

<!--
**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an
issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release
milestone **before the [Enhancement Freeze](https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core
Kubernetes i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release
Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These
checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.
-->

- [ ] Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high quality user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap.  It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself.  KEP editors, SIG Docs, and SIG PM
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.
-->

Currently there is a single set of conformance tests which are used to cover
all vendor and cloud provider Kubernetes offerings. Any given offering must
pass all conformance tests in order to be conforming. Therefore, the conformance
tests are limited to non-optional, GA features, in order to avoid excluding
offerings that do not implement an optional feature.

However, to meet the overall goal of the program - workload portability - it is
necessary to ensure that optional features, when available, are implemented in a
consistent manner. This KEP proposes the use of sets of functionality
(behaviors), referred to as “profiles”, and the mechanisms used to define and
validate those profiles.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users.  The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports][] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

The current set of conforming behaviors represents only a small subset of
Kubernetes functionality. This means that users and software packagers cannot
simply rely on the statement that a vendor’s offering is “Certified Kubernetes”
to know that the software will run successfully. For instance, an application
packaged as a Helm chart may use a PersistentVolume. Because that feature is not
part of the conformance program, there are valid, Certified Kubernetes
distributions that do not support it, and therefore the application deployment
will not succeed.

Even as we work to expand those behaviors to include all non-optional, GA
features, there is a substantial amount of functionality that may not apply to
all cluster deployments. For example, edge use cases may intentionally not offer
any stateful services. It would be beneficial for those deploying applications
to easily identify sets of functionality that are needed for their application,
and confirm that a given vendor offering (if not a specific cluster) is able to
support the application.

In this context, “optional” may be from a given user's point of view. For
example, the smallest, “base” profile should provide functionality that at a
minimum is capable of running stateless user workloads. From this user’s point
of view, cluster administration functions are not required.

Profiles also support a simplified model for determining if a given application
that has been packaged to run on Kubernetes (e.g., in a Helm chart) is able to
run on a given cluster. If clusters are classified into a small (~5-10) number
of profiles that define broad functional boundaries, applications will be able
to document the profiles required in order for them to run.

### Goals

 * Design and implement a mechanism to express profiles in the conformance
   behavior definitions.
 * Design and implement a mechanism to validate whether a cluster conforms to
   each profile.
 * Document guidance on how to choose the scope of individual profiles.
 * Document guidance on how to decide the profile in which a new feature
   belongs.
 * Define a base profile and at least one other profile.

### Non-Goals

 * Define a complete set of profiles that covers all behaviors. This is an
   ongoing effort for the conformance subproject.
 * Complete all tests to validate all profiles. This is an ongoing effort for
   the conformance subproject.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation.  The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system.  The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Role: Developer

As a developer of an optional feature, I must be able to define behaviors for
that feature that a vendor claiming support for the feature must follow.

#### Role: Plugin API & Plugin Developers

As a developer a pluggable API for Kubernetes, such as CNI, CSI, CRI, and
Ingress, I must be able to define behaviors which I expect plugins to follow,
and verify that a specific plugin properly implements those behaviors.

As an developer of a plugin for Kubernetes, I must be able to verify that my
plugin conforms to the expected behaviors.

#### Role: Application Packager

As an application packager preparing an application for deployment on
Kubernetes, I must be able to identify the profiles required to run the packaged
workloads.

#### Role: End User

As an end user deploying an application on Kubernetes, I must be able to
identify the profiles supported by my cluster and the application I wish to
deploy.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above.
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate.  Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed and by whom?

Consider including folks that also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable.  This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets.  If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Test Plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all of the test cases, just the general strategy.  Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation and anything particularly
challenging to test should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations).  Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

### Graduation Criteria

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Define graduation milestones.

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, or as something else. The KEP
should keep this high-level with a focus on what signals will be looked at to
determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning),
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general, we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless how the
functionality is accessed.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

- N examples of real world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least 2 releases between beta and
GA/stable, since there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

#### Removing a deprecated flag

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality which deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include [conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md
-->

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade in order to keep previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the life cycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider and why did you rule them out?  These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

## Infrastructure Needed (optional)

<!--
Use this section if you need things from the project/SIG.  Examples include a
new subproject, repos requested, github details.  Listing these here allows a
SIG to get the process for these resources started right away.
-->
