keps/sig-storage/1412-immutable-secrets-and-configmaps/README.md, before:

# Immutable ephemeral volumes

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
  - [Feature enablement and rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)
  - [Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning](#rollout-upgrade-and-rollback-planning)
  - [Monitoring requirements](#monitoring-requirements)
  - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  - [Scalability](#scalability)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Define immutability at VolumeSource level](#define-immutability-at-volumesource-level)
  - [Optimize watches](#optimize-watches)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release milestone **before [Enhancement Freeze](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core Kubernetes i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.

- [ ] kubernetes/enhancements issue in release milestone, which links to KEP (this should be a link to the KEP location in kubernetes/enhancements, not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] KEP approvers have set the KEP status to `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable` or significant changes once it is marked `implementable` should be approved by each of the KEP approvers. If any of those approvers is no longer appropriate than changes to that list should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or SIG-arch for cross cutting KEPs).

**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://github.com/kubernetes/website

## Summary

The most popular and the most convinient way of consuming Secrets and
ConfigMaps by Pods is consuming it as a file. However, any update to
a Secret or ConfigMap object is quickly (roughly within a minute)
reflected in updates of the file mounted for *all* Pods consuming them.
That means, that a bad update (push) of Secret and/or ConfigMap can
very quickly break the whole appplication.

The recommended approach for upgrading applications are obviously
rolling upgrades. For Secrets/ConfigMaps this is translating to
creating a new object and updating PodTemplate with the reference
to it. However, that doesn't protect users from outages caused by
accidental bad updates of existing Secrets and/or ConfigMaps.

Moreover, the feature of updating Secrets/ConfigMaps for running
Pods is also expensive from scalability/performance point of view.
Every Kubelet has to watch (default) or periodically poll every
unique Secret and ConfigMap referenced by any of the Pods it is
running.

## Motivation

In this KEP, we are proposing to introduce an ability to specify
that contents of a particular Secret/ConfigMap should be immutable
for its whole lifetime. For those Secrets/ConfigMap, Kubelets will
not be trying to watch/poll for changes to updated mounts for their
Pods.
Given there are a lot of users not really taking advantage of automatic
updates of Secrets/ConfigMaps due to consequences described above, this
will allow them to:
- protect themselves better for accidental bad updates that could cause
  outages of their applications
- achieve better performance of their cluster thanks to significant
  reduction of load on apiserver

### Goals

- introduce protection mechanism to avoid outages due to accidental
  updates of existing Secrets/ConfigMaps
- improve cluster performance by reducing load on Kubernetes control
  plane (mostly kube-apiserver) consumed by a feature many people
  would be willing to tradeoff for better scale/performance

### Non-Goals

- change the default behavior of consumption of Secrets/ConfigMaps

## Proposal

We propose to extend `ConfigMap` and `Secret` types with an additional
field:
```go
  Immutable *bool
```

If unset or set to false, all updates (including the change of the value
of Immutable field itself) remain possible.

If set to true, the machinery in apiserver will reject:
- any updates explicitly changing keys and/or values stored in Secrets
  and/or ConfigMaps
- any updates explicitly changing the value of `Immutable` field itself
  (marking Secret/ConfigMap as immutable cannot be reverted)

Note that mutating ObjectMetadata will remain to be possible independently
of the value of Immutable field to:
- not break object lifeycle (e.g. by introducing a deadlock if Finalizers
  are set)
- allow rotating certificates used for encryption at rest


Based on the value of `Immutable` field Kubelet will or will not:
- start a watch (or periodic polling) of a given Secret/ConfigMap
- perform updates of files mounted to a Pod based on updates of
  the Kubernetes object

### Risks and Mitigations

Given how closely the implementation of the feature will be related to
the implementation of automatic updates of Secrets/ConfigMaps, there is
a risk for introducing a bug and breaking that feature. The existing
unit and e2e tests should catch that, but we will audit them and add
new ones to cover the gaps if needed. Additionally, we will try to hide
the new logic behind the feature gate.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

For `Alpha`, we will add e2e tests verifying that contents of Secrets and
ConfigMaps marked as immutable really can't be updated. Additionally, these
will check if the metadata can be modified.

Additionally, unit tests will be added in Kubelet codebase to ensure that
the newly added logic to not watch immutable Secrets/ConfigMaps works as
expected.

For `Beta`, we will also extend scalability tests with a number of immutable
`Secrets` and `ConfigMaps` to validate the performance impact (for `Alpha`
only manual scalability tests will be performed).

### Graduation Criteria

Alpha:
- All tests describe above for `Alpha` are implemented and passing.
- Manual scalability tests prove the expected impact.

Beta:
- Scalability tests are extended to mount an immutable Secret and ConfigMap
for every single Pod, and that doesn't violate existing SLOs.

GA:
- No complaints about the API and user bug reports for 2 releases.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

No upgrade/downgrade concerns.

### Version Skew Strategy

On Nodes in versions on supporting the feature, Kubelet will still be watching
immutable Secrets and/or ConfigMaps. That said, this is purely a performance
improvement and doesn't have correctness implications. So those clusters will
simple have worse scalability characteristic.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature enablement and rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
    - Feature gate name: ImmutableEphemeralVolumes
    - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-apiserver, kubelet

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  No, users need to explicitly opt-in for secrets/configmaps immutability.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we rollback
  the enablement)?**
  Yes. kube-apiserver rollback allows for modifying secrets/configmaps.
  kubelet rollback causes that all secrets/configmaps are again being watched.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**
  If the `immutable` field of Secret/ConfigMap wasn't cleared up for some
  objects, this would result in making the immutable again.

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
  Only basic conversions tests.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How can a rollout fail? Can it impact already running workloads?**
  If some critical Secrets/Configmaps were marked as immutable it may not be
  able to update them if needed. No impact for already running workloads.

* **What specific metrics should inform a rollback?**
  No known rollback criteria.

* **Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?**
  Manual tests run to confirm that (on top of existing e2e tests):
  - setting immutable field is impossible when the feature is switched of
  - upgrade doesn't change behavior of existing objects
  - immutable fields (if previously set) are not cleared after rollback (which
    is a generic pattern used for all features)
  - given validation is not feature-gated, it's impossible to update data even
    after rollback
  - on second upgrade, Secrets/Configmaps previously marked as immutable,
    automatically are stopped being watched after Kubelet upgrade

* **Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features,
  APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?**
  No.

### Monitoring requirements

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?**
  Listing secrets/configmaps in the cluster and checking if any has immutable 
  field set.

* **What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to
  determine the health of the service?**
  None. It's not a feature, rather defence and optimization.
  That said, there will be indirect impact on `apiserver_request_total` metric.

* **What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the above SLIs?**
  None. It's not a feature, rather defence and optimization.

* **Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve
  observability if this feature?**
  Number of currently in-use immutable secrets/configmaps in kubelet to be added.

### Dependencies

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?**
  No

### Scalability

_For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them._

_For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions._

_For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirms the
previous answers based on experience in the field._

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?**
  No. It's rather the opposite, Secrets/ConfigMaps marked as immutable will
  not be watched by kubelets after determining their immutability.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?**
  No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to cloud
  provider?**
  No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count
  of the existing API objects?**
  Secrets/ConfigMaps marked as immutable will have additional `Immutable` field
  of boolean type set. Negligible from scalability/performance perspective.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any
  operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs][]?**
  No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of
  resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?**
  No.

### Troubleshooting

Troubleshooting section serves the `Playbook` role as of now. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now we leave it here though.

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?**
  No additional impact comparing to what already exists.

* **What are other known failure modes?**
  No known failure modes.

* **What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?**
  None.

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos

## Implementation History

2019-11-18: KEP opened
2019-12-09: KEP marked implementable
v1.18: Launched in `Alpha`
2020-04-25: Submitted PR to promote to Beta and enable by default.
2020-04-28: Scalability tests extended to validate this feature

## Alternatives

### Define immutability at VolumeSource level

Instead of making an object immutable, we could define immutability
per mount in VolumeSource.

Pros:
- higher granularity
Cons:
- unclear/tricky semantic on Kubelet restarts and Pod restarts/updates

### Optimize watches

We could potentially address scalability/performance aspect by optimizing
apimachinery. However, the bottlenecks seem to be mainly at the level of
Golang memory allocations.

Pros:
- no additional API
Cons:
- doesn't protect against unexpected bad updates causing outages
- unclear to what extent we can push the limits here (if at all)

Commit message:

Promote Immutable Secrets/ConfigMaps feature to GA

keps/sig-storage/1412-immutable-secrets-and-configmaps/README.md, after:

# Immutable ephemeral volumes

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy](#upgrade--downgrade-strategy)
  - [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
  - [Feature enablement and rollback](#feature-enablement-and-rollback)
  - [Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning](#rollout-upgrade-and-rollback-planning)
  - [Monitoring requirements](#monitoring-requirements)
  - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  - [Scalability](#scalability)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Define immutability at VolumeSource level](#define-immutability-at-volumesource-level)
  - [Optimize watches](#optimize-watches)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release milestone **before [Enhancement Freeze](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core Kubernetes i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [x] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [x] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [x] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [x] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [x] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [x] Production readiness review approved
- [x] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [x] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable` or significant changes once it is marked `implementable` should be approved by each of the KEP approvers. If any of those approvers is no longer appropriate than changes to that list should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or SIG-arch for cross cutting KEPs).

**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://github.com/kubernetes/website

## Summary

The most popular and the most convinient way of consuming Secrets and
ConfigMaps by Pods is consuming it as a file. However, any update to
a Secret or ConfigMap object is quickly (roughly within a minute)
reflected in updates of the file mounted for *all* Pods consuming them.
That means, that a bad update (push) of Secret and/or ConfigMap can
very quickly break the whole appplication.

The recommended approach for upgrading applications are obviously
rolling upgrades. For Secrets/ConfigMaps this is translating to
creating a new object and updating PodTemplate with the reference
to it. However, that doesn't protect users from outages caused by
accidental bad updates of existing Secrets and/or ConfigMaps.

Moreover, the feature of updating Secrets/ConfigMaps for running
Pods is also expensive from scalability/performance point of view.
Every Kubelet has to watch (default) or periodically poll every
unique Secret and ConfigMap referenced by any of the Pods it is
running.

## Motivation

In this KEP, we are proposing to introduce an ability to specify
that contents of a particular Secret/ConfigMap should be immutable
for its whole lifetime. For those Secrets/ConfigMap, Kubelets will
not be trying to watch/poll for changes to updated mounts for their
Pods.
Given there are a lot of users not really taking advantage of automatic
updates of Secrets/ConfigMaps due to consequences described above, this
will allow them to:
- protect themselves better for accidental bad updates that could cause
  outages of their applications
- achieve better performance of their cluster thanks to significant
  reduction of load on apiserver

### Goals

- introduce protection mechanism to avoid outages due to accidental
  updates of existing Secrets/ConfigMaps
- improve cluster performance by reducing load on Kubernetes control
  plane (mostly kube-apiserver) consumed by a feature many people
  would be willing to tradeoff for better scale/performance

### Non-Goals

- change the default behavior of consumption of Secrets/ConfigMaps

## Proposal

We propose to extend `ConfigMap` and `Secret` types with an additional
field:
```go
  Immutable *bool
```

If unset or set to false, all updates (including the change of the value
of Immutable field itself) remain possible.

If set to true, the machinery in apiserver will reject:
- any updates explicitly changing keys and/or values stored in Secrets
  and/or ConfigMaps
- any updates explicitly changing the value of `Immutable` field itself
  (marking Secret/ConfigMap as immutable cannot be reverted)

Note that mutating ObjectMetadata will remain to be possible independently
of the value of Immutable field to:
- not break object lifeycle (e.g. by introducing a deadlock if Finalizers
  are set)
- allow rotating certificates used for encryption at rest


Based on the value of `Immutable` field Kubelet will or will not:
- start a watch (or periodic polling) of a given Secret/ConfigMap
- perform updates of files mounted to a Pod based on updates of
  the Kubernetes object

### Risks and Mitigations

Given how closely the implementation of the feature will be related to
the implementation of automatic updates of Secrets/ConfigMaps, there is
a risk for introducing a bug and breaking that feature. The existing
unit and e2e tests should catch that, but we will audit them and add
new ones to cover the gaps if needed. Additionally, we will try to hide
the new logic behind the feature gate.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

For `Alpha`, e2e tests verifying that:
- data of immutable Secrets and ConfigMaps can't be updated
- metadata of immutable Secrets and ConfigMaps can be update
has been added.

Additionally, necessary unit tests were added in Kubelet codebase to ensure that
the newly added logic to not watch immutable Secrets/ConfigMaps works as
expected.

For `Beta`, scalability tests were extended to exercise this feature. Before this
change 10% of pods were mounting some Secret and some ConfigMap. This change allowed
us to mount some Secret and ConfigMap to every pod (however the remaining 90% of
pods mount immutable ones).

For `GA`, the introduced e2e tests will be promoted to conformance.

### Graduation Criteria

Alpha:
- All tests describe above for `Alpha` are implemented and passing.
- Manual scalability tests prove the expected impact.

Beta:
- Scalability tests are extended to mount an immutable Secret and ConfigMap
for every single Pod, and that doesn't violate existing SLOs.

GA:
- No complaints about the API and user bug reports for 2 releases.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

No upgrade/downgrade concerns.

### Version Skew Strategy

On Nodes in versions on supporting the feature, Kubelet will still be watching
immutable Secrets and/or ConfigMaps. That said, this is purely a performance
improvement and doesn't have correctness implications. So those clusters will
simple have worse scalability characteristic.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature enablement and rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
    - Feature gate name: ImmutableEphemeralVolumes
    - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-apiserver, kubelet

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  No, users need to explicitly opt-in for secrets/configmaps immutability.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we rollback
  the enablement)?**
  Yes. kube-apiserver rollback allows for modifying secrets/configmaps.
  kubelet rollback causes that all secrets/configmaps are again being watched.

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**
  If the `immutable` field of Secret/ConfigMap wasn't cleared up for some
  objects, this would result in making the immutable again.

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
  Only basic conversions tests.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How can a rollout fail? Can it impact already running workloads?**
  If some critical Secrets/Configmaps were marked as immutable it may not be
  able to update them if needed. No impact for already running workloads.

* **What specific metrics should inform a rollback?**
  No known rollback criteria.

* **Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?**
  Manual tests run to confirm that (on top of existing e2e tests):
  - setting immutable field is impossible when the feature is switched of
  - upgrade doesn't change behavior of existing objects
  - immutable fields (if previously set) are not cleared after rollback (which
    is a generic pattern used for all features)
  - given validation is not feature-gated, it's impossible to update data even
    after rollback
  - on second upgrade, Secrets/Configmaps previously marked as immutable,
    automatically are stopped being watched after Kubelet upgrade

* **Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features,
  APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?**
  No.

### Monitoring requirements

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?**
  Listing secrets/configmaps in the cluster and checking if any has immutable 
  field set.

* **What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to
  determine the health of the service?**
  None. It's not a feature, rather defence and optimization.
  That said, there will be indirect impact on `apiserver_request_total` metric.

* **What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the above SLIs?**
  None. It's not a feature, rather defence and optimization.

* **Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve
  observability if this feature?**
  Number of currently in-use immutable secrets/configmaps in kubelet to be added.

### Dependencies

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?**
  No

### Scalability

_For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them._

_For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions._

_For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirms the
previous answers based on experience in the field._

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?**
  No. It's rather the opposite, Secrets/ConfigMaps marked as immutable will
  not be watched by kubelets after determining their immutability.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?**
  No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to cloud
  provider?**
  No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count
  of the existing API objects?**
  Secrets/ConfigMaps marked as immutable will have additional `Immutable` field
  of boolean type set. Negligible from scalability/performance perspective.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any
  operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs][]?**
  No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of
  resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?**
  No.

### Troubleshooting

Troubleshooting section serves the `Playbook` role as of now. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now we leave it here though.

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?**
  No additional impact comparing to what already exists.

* **What are other known failure modes?**
  No known failure modes.

* **What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?**
  None.

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos

## Implementation History

2019-11-18: KEP opened

2019-12-09: KEP marked implementable

v1.18: Launched in `Alpha`

2020-04-25: Submitted PR to promote to Beta and enable by default.

2020-04-28: Scalability tests extended to validate this feature

v1.19: Launched to `Beta`

## Alternatives

### Define immutability at VolumeSource level

Instead of making an object immutable, we could define immutability
per mount in VolumeSource.

Pros:
- higher granularity
Cons:
- unclear/tricky semantic on Kubelet restarts and Pod restarts/updates

### Optimize watches

We could potentially address scalability/performance aspect by optimizing
apimachinery. However, the bottlenecks seem to be mainly at the level of
Golang memory allocations.

Pros:
- no additional API
Cons:
- doesn't protect against unexpected bad updates causing outages
- unclear to what extent we can push the limits here (if at all)
