keps/sig-storage/2923-csi-migration-ceph-rbd/README.md, before:

# In-tree Storage Plugin to CSI Migration - Ceph RBD Design Doc

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
  - [New Feature Gates](#new-feature-gates)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->


## Summary

This document present as a vendor specific KEP for the parent KEP
[CSI Migration](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration)

This inherits all the contents from its parent KEP. It will introduce two new feature gates to be 
used as as described in its parent KEP. For all other contents, please refer to the parent KEP.

### New Feature Gates

- CSIMigrationRbd
  - As describe in [CSI Migration](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration), 
  when this feature flag && the `CSIMigration` is enabled at the same time, all operations related to the 
  in-tree volume plugin `kubernetes.io/rbd` will be redirect to use the corresponding CSI driver. From a 
  user perspective, nothing will be noticed.
- InTreePluginRbdUnregister
  - This flag technically is not part of CSI Migration design. But it happens to be related and helps with 
  CSI Migration. The name speaks for itself, when this flag is enabled, kubernetes will not register the 
  `kubernetes.io/rbd` as one of the in-tree storage plugin provisioners. This flag standalone can work out 
  of CSI Migration features.
  - However, when all `InTreePluginRbdUnregister`, `CSIMigrationRbd` and `CSIMigration` feature 
  flags are enabled at the same time. The kube-controller-manager will skip the feature flag checking 
  on kubelet and treat Ceph RBD CSI migration as already complete. And directly redirect traffic to CSI 
  driver for all rbd related operations.


## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Please refer to the [CSI Migration Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration#production-readiness-review-questionnaire).

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a KEP should be tracked in `Implementation History`.

- 2021-09-08 KEP created

Major milestones for Ceph RBD in-tree plugin CSI migration:

- 1.23
  - CephRBD CSI migration to Alpha

Commit message:

Promote Ceph RBD CSI migration to Beta in v1.24
This commit adds the details to the KEP for promoting Ceph RBD CSI
migration from alpha to beta in v1.24

Signed-off-by: Humble Chirammal <hchiramm@redhat.com>

keps/sig-storage/2923-csi-migration-ceph-rbd/README.md, after:

# In-tree Storage Plugin to CSI Migration - Ceph RBD Design Doc

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
  - [New Feature Gates](#new-feature-gates)
- [Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](#production-readiness-review-questionnaire)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->


## Summary

This document present as a vendor specific KEP for the parent KEP
[CSI Migration](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration)

This inherits all the contents from its parent KEP. It will introduce two new feature gates to be 
used as described in its parent KEP. For all other contents, please refer to the parent KEP.

### New Feature Gates

- CSIMigrationRbd
  - As describe in [CSI Migration](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration), 
  when this feature flag && the `CSIMigration` is enabled at the same time, all operations related to the 
  in-tree volume plugin `kubernetes.io/rbd` will be redirected to use the corresponding CSI driver. From a
  user perspective, nothing will be noticed.
- InTreePluginRbdUnregister
  - This flag technically is not part of CSI Migration design. But it happens to be related and helps with 
  CSI Migration. The name speaks for itself, when this flag is enabled, kubernetes will not register the 
  `kubernetes.io/rbd` as one of the in-tree storage plugin provisioners. This flag standalone can work out 
  of CSI Migration features.
  - However, when all `InTreePluginRbdUnregister`, `CSIMigrationRbd` and `CSIMigration` feature 
  flags are enabled at the same time. The kube-controller-manager will skip the feature flag checking 
  on kubelet and treat Ceph RBD CSI migration as already complete. And directly redirect traffic to CSI 
  driver for all rbd related operations.


## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Please refer to the [CSI Migration Production Readiness Review Questionnaire](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/625-csi-migration#production-readiness-review-questionnaire).

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a KEP should be tracked in `Implementation History`.

- 2021-09-08 KEP created

Major milestones for Ceph RBD in-tree plugin CSI migration:

- 1.23
  - Ceph RBD CSI migration to Alpha
- 1.24
  - Ceph RBD CSI migration to Beta, off by default
