---
title: cgroups v2
authors:
  - "@giuseppe"
owning-sig: sig-node
participating-sigs:
      - sig-architecture
reviewers:
  - "@yujuhong"
  - "@dchen1107"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
approvers:
  - "@yujuhong"
  - "@dchen1107"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
editor: Giuseppe Scrivano
creation-date: 2019-11-18
last-updated: 2019-11-18
status: implementable
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# Cgroups v2

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Goals](#goals)
- [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [User Stories](#user-stories)
- [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Dependencies on OCI and container runtimes](#dependencies-on-oci-and-container-runtimes)
  - [Current status of dependencies](#current-status-of-dependencies)
- [Current cgroups usage and the equivalent in cgroups v2](#current-cgroups-usage-and-the-equivalent-in-cgroups-v2)
  - [cgroup namespace](#cgroup-namespace)
  - [Phase 1: Convert from cgroups v1 settings to v2](#phase-1-convert-from-cgroups-v1-settings-to-v2)
  - [Phase 2: Use cgroups v2 throughout the stack](#phase-2-use-cgroups-v2-throughout-the-stack)
- [Risk and Mitigations](#risk-and-mitigations)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

A proposal to add support for cgroups v2 to kubernetes.

## Motivation

The new kernel cgroups v2 API was declared stable more than two years
ago. Newer features in the kernel such as PSI depend upon cgroups
v2. cgroups v1 will eventually become obsolete in favor of cgroups v2.
Some distros are already using cgroups v2 by default, and that
prevents Kubernetes from working as it is required to run with cgroups
v1.

## Goals

This proposal aims to:

*   Add support for cgroups v2 to the Kubelet

## Non-Goals

*	Expose new cgroup2-only features
*	Dockershim
*	Plugins support

## User Stories

*   The Kubelet can run on a host using either cgroups v1 or v2.
*   Have features parity between cgroup v2 and v1.

## Implementation Details

## Proposal

The proposal is to implement cgroups v2 in two different phases.

The first phase ensures that any configuration file designed for
cgroups v1 will continue to work on cgroups v2.

The second phase requires changes through the entire stack, including
the OCI runtime specifications.

At startup the Kubelet detects what hierarchy the system is using.  It
checks the file system type for `/sys/fs/cgroup` (the equivalent of
`stat -f --format '%T' /sys/fs/cgroup`).  If the type is `cgroup2fs`
then the Kubelet will use only cgroups v2 during all its execution.

The current proposal doesn't aim at deprecating cgroup v1, that must
still be supported through the stack.

Device plugins that require v2 enablement are out of the scope for
this proposal.

### Dependencies on OCI and container runtimes

In order to support features only available in cgroups v2 but not in
cgroups v1, the OCI runtime specs must be changed.

New features that are not present in cgroup v1 are out of the scope
for this proposal.

The dockershim implementation embedded in the Kubelet won't be
supported on cgroup v2.

### Current status of dependencies

- CRI-O+crun: support cgroups v2

- runc support for cgroups v2 is work in progress [current status](#current-cgroups-usage-and-the-equivalent-in-cgroups-v2)

- containerd: [https://github.com/containerd/containerd/issues/3726](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/issues/3726)

- Moby: [https://github.com/moby/moby/pull/40174](https://github.com/moby/moby/pull/40174)

- OCI runtime spec: TODO

- cAdvisor already supports cgroups v2 ([https://github.com/google/cadvisor/pull/2309](https://github.com/google/cadvisor/pull/2309))

## Current cgroups usage and the equivalent in cgroups v2

|Kubernetes cgroups v1|Kubernetes cgroups v2 behavior|
|---|---|
|CPU stats for Horizontal Pod Autoscaling|No .percpu cpuacct stats.|
|CPU pinning based on integral cores|Cpuset controller available|
|Memory limits|Not changed, different naming|
|PIDs limits|Not changed, same naming|
|hugetlb|Added to linux-next, targeting Linux 5.6|

### cgroup namespace

A cgroup namespace restricts the view on the cgroups.  When
unshare(CLONE_NEWCGROUP) is done, the current cgroup the process
resides in becomes the root.  Other cgroups won't be visible from the
new namespace.  It was not enabled by default on a cgroup v1 system as
older kernel lacked support for it.

Privileged pods will still use the host cgroup namespace so to have
visibility on all the other cgroups.

### Phase 1: Convert from cgroups v1 settings to v2

We can convert the values passed by the k8s in cgroups v1 from to
cgroups v2 so Kubernetes users don’t have to change what they specify
in their manifests.

crun has implemented the conversion as follows:

**Memory controller**

| OCI (x) | cgroup 2 value (y) | conversion  |   comment |
|---|---|---|---|
| limit | memory.max | y = x ||
| swap | memory.swap.max | y = x ||
| reservation | memory.low | y = x ||

**PIDs controller**

| OCI (x) | cgroup 2 value (y) | conversion  |   comment |
|---|---|---|---|
| limit | pids.max | y = x ||

**CPU controller**

| OCI (x) | cgroup 2 value (y) | conversion  |  comment |
|---|---|---|---|
| shares | cpu.weight | y = (1 + ((x - 2) * 9999) / 262142) | convert from [2-262144] to [1-10000]|
| period | cpu.max | y = x| period and quota are written together|
| quota | cpu.max | y = x| period and quota are written together|

**blkio controller**

| OCI (x) | cgroup 2 value (y) | conversion  |   comment |
|---|---|---|---|
| weight | io.bfq.weight | y = (1 + (x - 10) * 9999 / 990) | convert linearly from [10-1000] to [1-10000]|
| weight_device | io.bfq.weight | y = (1 + (x - 10) * 9999 / 990) | convert linearly from [10-1000] to [1-10000]|
|rbps|io.max|y=x||
|wbps|io.max|y=x||
|riops|io.max|y=x||
|wiops|io.max|y=x||

**cpuset controller**

| OCI (x) | cgroup 2 value (y) | conversion  |   comment |
|---|---|---|---|
| cpus | cpuset.cpus | y = x ||
| mems | cpuset.mems | y = x ||

**hugetlb controller**

| OCI (x) | cgroup 2 value (y) | conversion  |   comment |
|---|---|---|---|
| <PAGE_SIZE>.limit_in_bytes | hugetlb.<PAGE_SIZE>.max | y = x ||

With this approach cAdvisor would have to read back values from
cgroups v2 files (already done).

Kubelet PR: [https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/85218](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/85218)

### Phase 2: Use cgroups v2 throughout the stack

This option means that the values are written directly to cgroups v2
by the runtime. The Kubelet doesn’t do any conversion when setting
these values over the CRI.  We will need to add a cgroups v2 specific
LinuxContainerResources to the CRI.

This depends upon the container runtimes like runc and crun to be able
to write cgroups v2 values directly.

OCI will need support for cgroups v2 and CRI implementations will
write to the cgroups v2 section of the new OCI runtime config.json.

## Risk and Mitigations

Some cgroups v1 features are not available with cgroups v2:

- _cpuacct.usage_percpu_
- network stats from cgroup

Some cgroups v1 controllers such as _device_ and _net_cls_,
_net_prio_ are not available with the new version.  The alternative to
these controllers is to use eBPF.

## Graduation Criteria

- Alpha: Phase 1 completed and basic support for running Kubernetes on
  a cgroups v2 host,  e2e tests coverage or have a plan for the
  failing tests.
  A good candidate for running cgroup v2 test is Fedora 31 that has
  already switched to default to cgroup v2.

- Beta: e2e tests coverage and performance testing.

- GA: Assuming no negative user feedback based on production
  experience, promote after 2 releases in beta.
  *TBD* whether phase 2 must be implemented for GA.
