keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/970-kubeadm-config/README.md, before:

# kubeadm Config file graduation (v1beta2)

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [v1beta1](#v1beta1)
    - [Decoupling the kubeadm types from other ComponentConfig types](#decoupling-the-kubeadm-types-from-other-componentconfig-types)
    - [Re-design how kubeadm configurations are persisted](#re-design-how-kubeadm-configurations-are-persisted)
    - [Use substructures instead of the old &quot;single flat object&quot;](#use-substructures-instead-of-the-old-single-flat-object)
  - [v1beta2](#v1beta2)
    - [Add config options for new and existing kubeadm features](#add-config-options-for-new-and-existing-kubeadm-features)
  - [v1beta3](#v1beta3)
    - [Make kubeadm's config format more CRD and third party friendly](#make-kubeadms-config-format-more-crd-and-third-party-friendly)
    - [Opt-in AddOns](#opt-in-addons)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
  - [v1alpha3 released with Kubernetes 1.12](#v1alpha3-released-with-kubernetes-112)
  - [v1beta1 released with Kubernetes 1.13](#v1beta1-released-with-kubernetes-113)
  - [v1beta2 released with Kubernetes 1.15](#v1beta2-released-with-kubernetes-115)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This KEP is meant to describe design goal and the proposed solution for implementing the kubeadm
config file format.

The kubeadm config file today is one of the first touch points with Kubernetes for many users and
also for higher level tools leveraging kubeadm; as a consequence, providing a more stable and
reliable config file format is considered one of the top priorities for graduating kubeadm itself
to GA and for the future of kubeadm itself.

## Motivation

The kubeadm config file is a set of YAML documents with versioned structs that follow the Kubernetes
API conventions with regards to `apiVersion` and `kind`, but these types aren’t exposed as an
API endpoint in the API server. kubeadm follows the ComponentConfig conventions.

The kubeadm config file was originally created as alternative to command line flags for `kubeadm init`
and `kubeadm join` actions, but over time the number of options supported by the kubeadm config file
has grown continuously, while the number of command line flags is intentionally kept under control
and limited to the most common and simplest use cases.

As a consequence today the kubeadm config file is the only viable way for implementing many use cases
like e.g. usage of an external etcd, customizing Kubernetes control plane components or kube-proxy
and kubelet parameters.

Additionally, the kubeadm config file today acts also as a persistent representation of the cluster
specification that can be used at a any points in time after `kubeadm init` e.g. for executing
`kubeadm upgrade` actions.

### Goals

- To provide a solution for decoupling the kubeadm ComponentConfig types from other Kubernetes
  components’ ComponentConfig types.

- To re-design how kubeadm configurations are persisted, addressing the known limitations/weakness
  of the current design; more in detail, with the aim to provide a better support for high
  availability clusters, it should be provided a clear separation between cluster wide settings,
  control plane instance settings, node/kubelet settings and runtime settings (setting used
  by the current command but not persisted).

- Improve the current kubeadm config file format by using specialized substructures instead
  of the old "single flat object with only fields".

### Non-Goals

- To steer/coordinate all the implementation efforts for adoption of ComponentConfig across all
  the different Kubernetes components.

- To define a new home for the Bootstrap Token Go structs.

- To address all possible proposed changes, that were proposed to the kubeadm config format.
  Specifically we are trying to avoid changes, that have a fairly limited use cases.

## Proposal

### v1beta1

This section outlines proposed changes to be made into v1beta1, possibly appearing in stages
in alpha versions between v1alpha2 and v1beta1.

#### Decoupling the kubeadm types from other ComponentConfig types

The `v1alpha2` kubeadm config types embeds the ComponentConfig for
kube-proxy and kubelet into the **MasterConfiguration** object; it is expected that also
ComponentConfig for kube-controller manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver will be added
in future (non goal of this KEP).

This strong type of dependency - embeds - already created some problem in the v1.10 cycle, and
despite some improvements, the current situation is not yet ideal, because e.g embedded dependency
could impact the kubeadm config file life cycle, forcing kubeadm to change its own config file
version every time one of the embedded component configurations changes.

`v1beta1` config file version is going to address this problem by removing embedded dependencies
from the _external_ kubeadm config types.

Instead, the user will be allowed to pass other component’s ComponentConfig in separated YAML
documents inside of the same YAML file given to `kubeadm init --config`.

> please note that the _kubeadm internal config_ might continue to embed components config
> for some time into the future because kubeadm uses its internal config to propagate the knowledge
> of such data structures e.g. for propagating network configuration settings to kubelet, setting
> defaults, validating or manipulating YAML etc.

#### Re-design how kubeadm configurations are persisted

In `v1alpha2` the kubeadm **MasterConfiguration** struct is persisted as a whole into the
`kubeadm-config` ConfigMap, but this situation has well know limitations/weaknesses:

- There is no clear distinction between cluster wide settings (e.g. the kube-apiserver server
  extra-args that should be consistent across all instances) and control plane instance settings
  (e.g. the API server advertise address of a kube-apiserver instance).
  NB. This is currently the main blocker for implementing support for high availability clusters
  in kubeadm.

- There is no clear distinction between cluster wide settings and node/kubelet specific
  settings (e.g. the node name of the current node)

- There is no clear distinction between cluster wide settings and runtime configurations
  (e.g. the token that should be created by kubeadm init)

- ComponentConfigs are stored both in the `kubeadm-config` and in the `kubeproxy-config` and
  `kubelet-config-vX.Y` ConfigMaps, with the first used as authoritative source for updates,
  while the others are the one effectively used by components.

Considering all the above points, and also the split of the other components ComponentConfigs
from the kubeadm **MasterConfiguration** type described in the previous paragraph, it should
be re-designed how kubeadm configuration is persisted.

The proposed solution leverage on the new kubeadm capability to handle separated YAML documents
inside of the same kubeadm-config YAML file. More in detail:

- **MasterConfiguration** will be split into two other top-level kinds: **InitConfiguration**
  and **ClusterConfiguration**.
- **InitConfiguration** will host the node-specific options like the node name, kubelet CLI flag
  overrides locally, and ephemeral, init-only configuration like the Bootstrap Tokens to initialize
  the cluster with.
- **ClusterConfiguration** will host the cluster-wide configuration, and **ClusterConfiguration**
  is the object that will be stored in the `kubeadm-config` ConfigMap.
- Additionally, **NodeConfiguration** will be renamed to **JoinConfiguration** to be consistent with
  **InitConfiguration** and highlight the coupling to the `kubeadm join` command and its
  ephemeral nature.

The new `kubeadm init` flow configuration-wise is summarized by the attached schema.

![kubeadm-init](kubeadm-init.png)

[link](kubeadm-init.png)

As a consequence, also how the kubeadm configuration is consumed by kubeadm commands should
be adapted as described by following schemas:

- [kubeadm join and kubeadm join --master](kubeadm-join.png)
- [kubeadm upgrade apply](kubeadm-upgrade-apply.png)
- [kubeadm upgrade node](kubeadm-upgrade-node.png)
- [kubeadm reset](kubeadm-reset.png)

#### Use substructures instead of the old "single flat object"

Even if with few exceptions, the kubeadm **MasterConfiguration** and **NodeConfiguration** types
in `v1alpha1` and `v1alpha2` are basically single, flat objects that holds all the configuration
settings, and this fact e.g. doesn’t allow to a clearly/easily understand which configuration
options relate to each other or apply to the different control plane components.

While redesigning the config file for addressing the main issues described in previous paragraphs,
kubeadm will provide also a cleaner representation of attributes belonging to single component/used
for a specific goal by creating dedicated objects, similarly to what’s already improved for
etcd configuration in the `v1alpha2` version.

### v1beta2

This section outlines changes to be introduced in a second iteration of the kubeadm config format.

#### Add config options for new and existing kubeadm features

Over time kubeadm gains new features which may require the addition of new settings to the config
format. One notable such feature, that was introduced after the release of `v1beta1` is the
[Certificates copy for join --control-plane KEP](./20190122-Certificates-copy-for-kubeadm-join--control-plane.md).

In addition to that, some new settings are added to the config format for existing features,
improving the original design and addressing user feedbacks.
These include an ability to specify the timeout that is used to wait for the API server to become
active (a setting already introduced in `v1beta1`) and an ability to ignore some pre-flight errors
(a setting to be introduced in `v1beta2`).

Nevertheless, SIG Cluster Lifecycle should be careful not to add fields that are needed for fairly
limited use cases.

### v1beta3

This section outlines changes to be introduced in the third iteration of the kubeadm config format.

#### Make kubeadm's config format more CRD and third party friendly

With more and more external tools consuming and providing kubeadm configuration it is desirable to increase the compatibility with other tools.
This includes:
- Adding metadata fields to InitConfiguration, JoinConfiguration and ClusterConfiguration.
- Marking omitempty fields as `+optional`.

#### Opt-in AddOns

In the past few releases users have been increasingly using the kubeadm phases feature to skip the installation of the Kube-Proxy and CoreDNS/Kube-DNS addons. This, however, causes some problems when joining new nodes to the cluster or upgrading existing ones, as there are no means of persisting the user wish to not install some of the addons.
This, combined with recent developments in the Cluster AddOns sub-project of SIG Cluster Lifecycle, led us to believe, that the best way to tackle the problem at hand is to allow for users to specify precisely which addons should be installed by kubeadm and persist the choice in the ClusterConfiguration.

### Risks and Mitigations

This is a change mostly driven by kubeadm maintainers, without an explicit buy-in from customers
using kubeadm in large installations

The differences from the current config file are relevant and kubeadm users can get confused.

Above risks will be mitigated by:

- providing a fully automated conversion mechanism and a set of utilities under the kubeadm
  config command (a goal and requirement for this KEP)
- The new structure could potentially make configuration options less discoverable as they’re
  buried deeper in the code. Sufficient documentation for common and advanced tasks will help
  mitigate this.
- writing a blog post before the release cut
- providing adequate instructions in the release notes

Impact on the code is considerable.

This risk will be mitigated by implementing the change according to following approach:

- introducing a new `v1alpha3` config file as a intermediate step before `v1beta1`
- implementing all the new machinery e.g. for managing multi YAML documents in one file, early
  in the cycle
- ensuring full test coverage about conversion from `v1alpha2` to `v1alpha3`, early in the cycle
- postponing the final rename from `v1alpha3` to `v1beta1` only when all the graduation criteria
  are met, or if this is not the case, iterating the above steps in following release cycles

## Graduation Criteria

- There is an upgrade path from earlier versions.
- The primary kinds that can be serialized/deserialized are `InitConfiguration`,
  `JoinConfiguration` and `ClusterConfiguration`.
- ComponentConfig structs for other Kubernetes components are supplied besides
  `ClusterConfiguration` in different YAML documents.
- SIG Cluster Life cycle is happy with the structure of the types.

## Implementation History

### v1alpha3 released with Kubernetes 1.12

- The kubeadm own types were decoupled from the other component config types.
- Clear distinction was introduced between cluster wide settings (stored on a config map in the
  cluster), node only and runtime settings.

### v1beta1 released with Kubernetes 1.13

- Focus on providing more structure of the config format, in contrast with large and mostly flat
  structures that deal with different kinds of settings.
- Improved the config format with respect to HA.

### v1beta2 released with Kubernetes 1.15

- Added new fields for specifying the encryption key for certificates and for specifying which pre-flight errors to be ignored.
- **omitempty** has a wider use, but is removed from the *taints* field of NodeRegistrationOptions.

## Drawbacks

The differences from the current kubeadm config are relevant and kubeadm users can get confused.

The impacts on the current codebase are considerable it is required an high commitment from
the SIG. This comes with a real opportunity cost.

Commit message:

sig-cluster-lifecycle: update the kubeadm config KEP for 1.22
Add updates for v1beta3 which is planned for 1.22.

keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/970-kubeadm-config/README.md, after:

# kubeadm Config file graduation

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [v1beta1](#v1beta1)
    - [Decoupling the kubeadm types from other ComponentConfig types](#decoupling-the-kubeadm-types-from-other-componentconfig-types)
    - [Re-design how kubeadm configurations are persisted](#re-design-how-kubeadm-configurations-are-persisted)
    - [Use substructures instead of the old &quot;single flat object&quot;](#use-substructures-instead-of-the-old-single-flat-object)
  - [v1beta2](#v1beta2)
    - [Add config options for new and existing kubeadm features](#add-config-options-for-new-and-existing-kubeadm-features)
  - [v1beta3](#v1beta3)
    - [Make kubeadm's config format more CRD and third party friendly](#make-kubeadms-config-format-more-crd-and-third-party-friendly)
    - [Allow skipping phases via config](#allow-skipping-phases-via-config)
    - [Remove deprecated structures and fields](#remove-deprecated-structures-and-fields)
    - [Other changes](#other-changes)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
  - [v1alpha3 released with Kubernetes 1.12](#v1alpha3-released-with-kubernetes-112)
  - [v1beta1 released with Kubernetes 1.13](#v1beta1-released-with-kubernetes-113)
  - [v1beta2 released with Kubernetes 1.15](#v1beta2-released-with-kubernetes-115)
  - [v1beta3 released with Kubernetes 1.22](#v1beta3-released-with-kubernetes-122)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This KEP is meant to describe design goal and the proposed solution for implementing the kubeadm
config file format.

The kubeadm config file today is one of the first touch points with Kubernetes for many users and
also for higher level tools leveraging kubeadm; as a consequence, providing a more stable and
reliable config file format is considered one of the top priorities for graduating kubeadm itself
to GA and for the future of kubeadm itself.

## Motivation

The kubeadm config file is a set of YAML documents with versioned structs that follow the Kubernetes
API conventions with regards to `apiVersion` and `kind`, but these types aren’t exposed as an
API endpoint in the API server. kubeadm follows the ComponentConfig conventions.

The kubeadm config file was originally created as alternative to command line flags for `kubeadm init`
and `kubeadm join` actions, but over time the number of options supported by the kubeadm config file
has grown continuously, while the number of command line flags is intentionally kept under control
and limited to the most common and simplest use cases.

As a consequence today the kubeadm config file is the only viable way for implementing many use cases
like e.g. usage of an external etcd, customizing Kubernetes control plane components or kube-proxy
and kubelet parameters.

Additionally, the kubeadm config file today acts also as a persistent representation of the cluster
specification that can be used at a any points in time after `kubeadm init` e.g. for executing
`kubeadm upgrade` actions.

### Goals

- To provide a solution for decoupling the kubeadm ComponentConfig types from other Kubernetes
  components’ ComponentConfig types.

- To re-design how kubeadm configurations are persisted, addressing the known limitations/weakness
  of the current design; more in detail, with the aim to provide a better support for high
  availability clusters, it should be provided a clear separation between cluster wide settings,
  control plane instance settings, node/kubelet settings and runtime settings (setting used
  by the current command but not persisted).

- Improve the current kubeadm config file format by using specialized substructures instead
  of the old "single flat object with only fields".

### Non-Goals

- To steer/coordinate all the implementation efforts for adoption of ComponentConfig across all
  the different Kubernetes components.

- To define a new home for the Bootstrap Token Go structs.

- To address all possible proposed changes, that were proposed to the kubeadm config format.
  Specifically we are trying to avoid changes, that have a fairly limited use cases.

## Proposal

### v1beta1

This section outlines proposed changes to be made into v1beta1, possibly appearing in stages
in alpha versions between v1alpha2 and v1beta1.

#### Decoupling the kubeadm types from other ComponentConfig types

The `v1alpha2` kubeadm config types embeds the ComponentConfig for
kube-proxy and kubelet into the **MasterConfiguration** object; it is expected that also
ComponentConfig for kube-controller manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver will be added
in future (non goal of this KEP).

This strong type of dependency - embeds - already created some problem in the v1.10 cycle, and
despite some improvements, the current situation is not yet ideal, because e.g embedded dependency
could impact the kubeadm config file life cycle, forcing kubeadm to change its own config file
version every time one of the embedded component configurations changes.

`v1beta1` config file version is going to address this problem by removing embedded dependencies
from the _external_ kubeadm config types.

Instead, the user will be allowed to pass other component’s ComponentConfig in separated YAML
documents inside of the same YAML file given to `kubeadm init --config`.

> please note that the _kubeadm internal config_ might continue to embed components config
> for some time into the future because kubeadm uses its internal config to propagate the knowledge
> of such data structures e.g. for propagating network configuration settings to kubelet, setting
> defaults, validating or manipulating YAML etc.

#### Re-design how kubeadm configurations are persisted

In `v1alpha2` the kubeadm **MasterConfiguration** struct is persisted as a whole into the
`kubeadm-config` ConfigMap, but this situation has well know limitations/weaknesses:

- There is no clear distinction between cluster wide settings (e.g. the kube-apiserver server
  extra-args that should be consistent across all instances) and control plane instance settings
  (e.g. the API server advertise address of a kube-apiserver instance).
  NB. This is currently the main blocker for implementing support for high availability clusters
  in kubeadm.

- There is no clear distinction between cluster wide settings and node/kubelet specific
  settings (e.g. the node name of the current node)

- There is no clear distinction between cluster wide settings and runtime configurations
  (e.g. the token that should be created by kubeadm init)

- ComponentConfigs are stored both in the `kubeadm-config` and in the `kubeproxy-config` and
  `kubelet-config-vX.Y` ConfigMaps, with the first used as authoritative source for updates,
  while the others are the one effectively used by components.

Considering all the above points, and also the split of the other components ComponentConfigs
from the kubeadm **MasterConfiguration** type described in the previous paragraph, it should
be re-designed how kubeadm configuration is persisted.

The proposed solution leverage on the new kubeadm capability to handle separated YAML documents
inside of the same kubeadm-config YAML file. More in detail:

- **MasterConfiguration** will be split into two other top-level kinds: **InitConfiguration**
  and **ClusterConfiguration**.
- **InitConfiguration** will host the node-specific options like the node name, kubelet CLI flag
  overrides locally, and ephemeral, init-only configuration like the Bootstrap Tokens to initialize
  the cluster with.
- **ClusterConfiguration** will host the cluster-wide configuration, and **ClusterConfiguration**
  is the object that will be stored in the `kubeadm-config` ConfigMap.
- Additionally, **NodeConfiguration** will be renamed to **JoinConfiguration** to be consistent with
  **InitConfiguration** and highlight the coupling to the `kubeadm join` command and its
  ephemeral nature.

The new `kubeadm init` flow configuration-wise is summarized by the attached schema.

![kubeadm-init](kubeadm-init.png)

[link](kubeadm-init.png)

As a consequence, also how the kubeadm configuration is consumed by kubeadm commands should
be adapted as described by following schemas:

- [kubeadm join and kubeadm join --master](kubeadm-join.png)
- [kubeadm upgrade apply](kubeadm-upgrade-apply.png)
- [kubeadm upgrade node](kubeadm-upgrade-node.png)
- [kubeadm reset](kubeadm-reset.png)

#### Use substructures instead of the old "single flat object"

Even if with few exceptions, the kubeadm **MasterConfiguration** and **NodeConfiguration** types
in `v1alpha1` and `v1alpha2` are basically single, flat objects that holds all the configuration
settings, and this fact e.g. doesn’t allow to a clearly/easily understand which configuration
options relate to each other or apply to the different control plane components.

While redesigning the config file for addressing the main issues described in previous paragraphs,
kubeadm will provide also a cleaner representation of attributes belonging to single component/used
for a specific goal by creating dedicated objects, similarly to what’s already improved for
etcd configuration in the `v1alpha2` version.

### v1beta2

This section outlines changes to be introduced in a second Beta iteration of the kubeadm configuration.

#### Add config options for new and existing kubeadm features

Over time kubeadm gains new features which may require the addition of new settings to the config
format. One notable such feature, that was introduced after the release of `v1beta1` is the
[Certificates copy for join --control-plane KEP](./20190122-Certificates-copy-for-kubeadm-join--control-plane.md).

In addition to that, some new settings are added to the config format for existing features,
improving the original design and addressing user feedbacks.
These include an ability to specify the timeout that is used to wait for the API server to become
active (a setting already introduced in `v1beta1`) and an ability to ignore some pre-flight errors
(a setting to be introduced in `v1beta2`).

Nevertheless, SIG Cluster Lifecycle should be careful not to add fields that are needed for fairly
limited use cases.

### v1beta3

This section outlines changes to be introduced in a third Beta iteration of the kubeadm configuration.

The version introduces no drastic changes since v1beta2. It performs cleanup of deprecated features
and introduces features that have seen high demand.

#### Make kubeadm's config format more CRD and third party friendly

With more and more external tools consuming and providing kubeadm configuration it is desirable to increase the compatibility with other tools.
This includes:
- Adding metadata fields to InitConfiguration, JoinConfiguration and ClusterConfiguration.
- Marking omitempty fields as `+optional`.

#### Allow skipping phases via config

In the past few releases users have been increasingly using the kubeadm phases feature to skip the
installation of the bundled kube-proxy and CoreDNS addon. From the configuration API this will be
done with a `skipPhases` field (string slice) that is part of InitConfiguration and JoinConfiguration.

#### Remove deprecated structures and fields

- `ClusterStatus`: deprecated and replaced by annotating the kube-apiserver Pod.
- `ClusterConfiguration.dns.type`: no longer needed since kubeadm only supports CoreDNS.
- `ClusterConfiguration.useHyperkubeImage`: hyperkube was previously deprecated.

#### Other changes

Lower priority changes will be a best effort.

### Risks and Mitigations

This is a change mostly driven by kubeadm maintainers, without an explicit buy-in from customers
using kubeadm in large installations

The differences from the current config file are relevant and kubeadm users can get confused.

Above risks will be mitigated by:

- providing a fully automated conversion mechanism and a set of utilities under the kubeadm
  config command (a goal and requirement for this KEP)
- The new structure could potentially make configuration options less discoverable as they’re
  buried deeper in the code. Sufficient documentation for common and advanced tasks will help
  mitigate this.
- writing a blog post before the release cut
- providing adequate instructions in the release notes

Impact on the code is considerable.

This risk will be mitigated by implementing the change according to following approach:

- introducing a new `v1alpha3` config file as a intermediate step before `v1beta1`
- implementing all the new machinery e.g. for managing multi YAML documents in one file, early
  in the cycle
- ensuring full test coverage about conversion from `v1alpha2` to `v1alpha3`, early in the cycle
- postponing the final rename from `v1alpha3` to `v1beta1` only when all the graduation criteria
  are met, or if this is not the case, iterating the above steps in following release cycles

## Graduation Criteria

- There is an upgrade path from earlier versions.
- The primary kinds that can be serialized/deserialized are `InitConfiguration`,
  `JoinConfiguration` and `ClusterConfiguration`.
- ComponentConfig structs for other Kubernetes components are supplied besides
  `ClusterConfiguration` in different YAML documents.
- SIG Cluster Life cycle is happy with the structure of the types.

## Implementation History

### v1alpha3 released with Kubernetes 1.12

- The kubeadm own types were decoupled from the other component config types.
- Clear distinction was introduced between cluster wide settings (stored on a config map in the
  cluster), node only and runtime settings.

### v1beta1 released with Kubernetes 1.13

- Focus on providing more structure of the config format, in contrast with large and mostly flat
  structures that deal with different kinds of settings.
- Improved the config format with respect to HA.

### v1beta2 released with Kubernetes 1.15

- Added new fields for specifying the encryption key for certificates and for specifying which pre-flight errors to be ignored.
- **omitempty** has a wider use, but is removed from the *taints* field of NodeRegistrationOptions.

### v1beta3 released with Kubernetes 1.22

- Details for the changes in v1beta3 since v1beta2 can be seen in the
[changelog](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta3).
- v1beta1 removed.

## Drawbacks

The differences from the current kubeadm config are relevant and kubeadm users can get confused.

The impacts on the current codebase are considerable it is required an high commitment from
the SIG. This comes with a real opportunity cost.
